
The Gospel According to Matthew

1:1The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. 1:2Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers. 1:3Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of Ram. 1:4Ram became the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of Salmon. 1:5Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse. 1:6Jesse became the father of David the king. David became the father of Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah. 1:7Solomon became the father of Rehoboam. Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa. 1:8Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of Uzziah. 1:9Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah. 1:10Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh. Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah. 1:11Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the exile to Babylon. 1:12After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel. 1:13Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor. 1:14Azor became the father of Sadoc. Sadoc became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud. 1:15Eliud became the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of Jacob. 1:16Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 1:17So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations.

1:18Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this; because when his mother, Mary, had been engaged to Joseph, before they came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit. 1:19Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her away secretly. 1:20But when he thought about these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, "Joseph, son of David, don't be afraid to take to yourself Mary, your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. 1:21She shall bring forth a son. You shall call his name Jesus, for it is he who shall save his people from their sins."

1:22Now all this has happened, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,

 1:23"Behold, the virgin shall be with child,
      And shall bring forth a son.

 They shall call his name Immanuel;" which is, being interpreted, "God with us."

1:24Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself; 1:25and didn't know her sexually until she had brought forth her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.

2:1Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, 2:2"Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him." 2:3When Herod the king heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. 2:4Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born. 2:5They said to him, "In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written through the prophet,

 2:6'You Bethlehem, land of Judah,
      Are in no way least among the princes of Judah:

 For out of you shall come forth a governor,
      Who shall shepherd my people, Israel.'"

2:7Then Herod secretly called the wise men, and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared. 2:8He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, "Go and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him, bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him."

2:9They, having heard the king, went their way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child was. 2:10When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy. 2:11They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh. 2:12Being warned in a dream that they shouldn't return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way.

2:13Now when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, "Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him."

2:14He arose and took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt, 2:15and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, "Out of Egypt I called my son."

2:16Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent forth, and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem, and in all the surrounding countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men. 2:17Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,

 2:18"A voice was heard in Ramah,
      Lamentation, weeping and great mourning,

 Rachel weeping for her children;
      She wouldn't be comforted,
      Because they are no more."

2:19But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, 2:20"Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young child's life are dead."

2:21He arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. 2:22But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of Galilee, 2:23and came and lived in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets: "He will be called a Nazarene."

3:1In those days, John the Baptizer came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying, 3:2"Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!" 3:3For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying,

 "The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
      Make ready the way of the Lord,
      Make his paths straight."

3:4Now John himself had clothing made of camel's hair, and a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey. 3:5Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea, and all the region around the Jordan went out to him. 3:6They were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins. 3:7But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, "You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 3:8Therefore bring forth fruit worthy of repentance! 3:9Don't think to yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father,' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.

3:10Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore, every tree that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire. 3:11I indeed baptize you in water for repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to carry. He shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit. 3:12His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire."

3:13Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him. 3:14But John would have hindered him, saying, "I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?"

3:15But Jesus, answering, said to him, "Allow it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness." Then he allowed him. 3:16Jesus, when he was baptized, went up directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him. 3:17Behold, a voice out of the heavens said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

4:1Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. 4:2When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry afterward. 4:3The tempter came and said to him, "If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread."

4:4But he answered, "It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.'" 4:5Then the devil took him into the holy city. He set him on the pinnacle of the temple, 4:6and said to him, "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, 'He will give his angels charge concerning you.' and,

 'On their hands they will bear you up,
      So that you don't dash your foot against a stone.'"

4:7Jesus said to him, "Again, it is written, 'You shall not test the Lord, your God.'"

4:8Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory. 4:9He said to him, "I will give you all of these things, if you will fall down and worship me."

4:10Then Jesus said to him, "Get behind me, Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.'"

4:11Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and ministered to him. 4:12Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee. 4:13Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali, 4:14that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

 4:15"The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali,
      Toward the sea, beyond the Jordan,
      Galilee of the Gentiles,

 4:16The people who sat in darkness saw a great light,
      To those who sat in the region and shadow of death,
      To them light has dawned."

4:17From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say, "Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."

4:18Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen. 4:19He said to them, "Come, follow me, and I will make you fishers for men."

4:20They immediately left their nets and followed him. 4:21Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, in the boat with Zebedee, their father, mending their nets. He called them. 4:22They immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him.

4:23Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people. 4:24The report about him went forth into all Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them. 4:25Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and from beyond the Jordan followed him.

5:1Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto a mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him. 5:2He opened his mouth and taught them, saying,

 5:3"Blessed are the poor in spirit,
      For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

 5:4Blessed are those who mourn,
      For they shall be comforted.

 5:5Blessed are the humble,
      For they shall inherit the earth.

 5:6Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness,
      For they shall be filled.

 5:7Blessed are the merciful,
      For they shall obtain mercy.

 5:8Blessed are the pure in heart,
      For they shall see God.

 5:9Blessed are the peacemakers,
      For they shall be called sons of God.

 5:10Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness' sake,
      For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

5:11"Blessed are you when people reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 5:12Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you.

5:13You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men. 5:14You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill can't be hidden. 5:15Neither do you light a lamp, and put it under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are in the house. 5:16Even so, let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

5:17Don't think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets. I didn't come to destroy, but to fulfill. 5:18For most assuredly, I tell you, until heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letter or one tiny pen stroke shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are accomplished. 5:19Whoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and teach others to do so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. 5:20For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way you shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

5:21"You have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'You shall not murder;' and 'Whoever shall murder shall be in danger of the judgment.' 5:22But I tell you, that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother, 'Raca!' shall be in danger of the council; and whoever shall say, 'You fool!' shall be in danger of the fire of Gehenna.

5:23If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against you, 5:24leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift. 5:25Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are with him in the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison. 5:26Most assuredly I tell you, you shall by no means get out of there, until you have paid the last penny.

5:27"You have heard that it was said, 'You shall not commit adultery;' 5:28but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart. 5:29If your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and cast it from you. For it is profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna. 5:30If your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from you: for it is profitable for you that one of your members should perish, and not your whole body be cast into Gehenna.

5:31"It was also said, 'Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,' 5:32but I tell you that whoever who puts away his wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery.

5:33"Again you have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to the Lord your vows,' 5:34but I tell you, don't swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; 5:35nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 5:36Neither shall you swear by your head, for you can't make one hair white or black. 5:37But let your speech be, 'Yes, yes; No, no.' Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.

5:38"You have heard that it was said, 'An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.' 5:39But I tell you, don't resist him who is evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also. 5:40If any man would go to law with you and take away your coat, let him have your cloak also. 5:41Whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two. 5:42Give to him who asks you, and don't turn away him who desires to borrow from you.

5:43"You have heard that it was said, 'You shall love your neighbor, and hate your enemy.' 5:44But I tell you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who spitefully use you and persecute you, 5:45that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust. 5:46For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Don't even the tax collectors do the same? 5:47If you only greet your friends, what more do you do than others? Don't even the tax collectors do the same? 5:48Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.

6:1"Be careful that you don't do your charitable giving before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no reward with your Father who is in heaven. 6:2Therefore when you do merciful deeds, don't sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most assuredly I tell you, they have received their reward. 6:3But when you do merciful deeds, don't let your left hand know what your right hand does, 6:4so that your merciful deeds may be in secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.

6:5"When you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most assuredly, I tell you, they have received their reward. 6:6But you, when you pray, enter into your inner chamber, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly. 6:7In praying, don't use vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking. 6:8Therefore don't be like them, for your Father knows what things you need, before you ask him. 6:9Pray like this: 'Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy. 6:10May your kingdom come. May your will be done, as in heaven, so on earth. 6:11Give us this day our daily bread. 6:12Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors. 6:13Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory forever. Amen.'

6:14For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. 6:15But if you don't forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

6:16"Moreover when you fast, don't be like the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most assuredly I tell you, they have received their reward. 6:17But you, when you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face; 6:18that you are not seen by men to be fasting, but by your Father who is in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.

6:19"Don't lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal; 6:20but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don't break through and steal; 6:21for where your treasure is, your heart will be there also.

6:22"The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light. 6:23But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!

6:24"No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. You can't serve both God and Mammon. 6:25Therefore, I tell you, don't be anxious for your life, what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for your body, what you will put on. Isn't life more than food, and the body more than clothing? 6:26See the birds of the sky, that they don't sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren't you of much more value than they?

6:27"Which of you, by being anxious, can add one cubit to the measure of his life? 6:28Why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin, 6:29yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these. 6:30But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, won't he much more clothe you, you of little faith?

6:31"Therefore don't be anxious, saying, 'What will we eat?', 'What will we drink?' or, 'With what will we be clothed?' 6:32For the Gentiles seek after all these things, for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. 6:33But seek first God's Kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things will be added to you. 6:34Therefore don't be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day's own evil is sufficient.

7:1"Don't judge, so that you won't be judged. 7:2For with whatever judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you. 7:3Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye? 7:4Or how will you tell your brother, 'Let me remove the speck from your eye;' and behold, the beam is in your own eye? 7:5You hypocrite! First remove the beam out of your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of your brother's eye.

7:6"Don't give that which is holy to the dogs, neither cast your pearls before the pigs, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces.

7:7"Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and you will find. Knock, and it will be opened to you. 7:8For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened. 7:9Or what man is there of you, who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone? 7:10Or if he asks for a fish, who will give him a serpent? 7:11If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him! 7:12Therefore whatever you desire for men to do to you, you shall also do to them; for this is the law and the prophets.

7:13"Enter in by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many are those who enter in by it. 7:14How narrow is the gate, and restricted is the way that leads to life! Few are those who find it.

7:15"Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. 7:16By their fruits you will know them. Do you gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles? 7:17Even so, every good tree brings forth good fruit; but the corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. 7:18A good tree can't bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 7:19Every tree that doesn't grow good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire. 7:20Therefore, by their fruits you will know them. 7:21Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord,' will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. 7:22Many will tell me in that day, 'Lord, Lord, didn't we prophesy by your name, by your name cast out demons, and by your name do many mighty works?' 7:23Then I will tell them, 'I never knew you. Depart from me, you who work iniquity.'

7:24"Everyone therefore who hears these words of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his house on a rock.7:25The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it didn't fall, for it was founded on the rock. 7:26Everyone who hears these words of mine, and doesn't do them will be like a foolish man, who built his house on the sand. 7:27The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it fell -- and great was its fall."

7:28It happened, when Jesus had finished saying these things, that the multitudes were astonished at his teaching, 7:29for he taught them with authority, and not like the scribes.

8:1When he came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. 8:2Behold, a leper came to him and worshiped him, saying, "Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean."

8:3Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, "I want to. Be made clean." Immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 8:4Jesus said to him, "See that you tell nobody, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them."

8:5When he came into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking him, 8:6and saying, "Lord, my servant lies in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented."

8:7Jesus said to him, "I will come and heal him."

8:8The centurion answered, "Lord, I'm not worthy for you to come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant will be healed. 8:9For I am also a man under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go,' and he goes; and to another, 'Come,' and he comes; and to my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it."

8:10When Jesus heard it, he marveled, and said to those who followed, "Most assuredly I tell you, I haven't found so great a faith, not even in Israel. 8:11I tell you that many will come from the east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, 8:12but the sons of the kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness. There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth." 8:13Jesus said to the centurion, "Go your way. Let it be done for you as you as you have believed." His servant was healed in that hour.

8:14When Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother lying sick of a fever. 8:15He touched her hand, and the fever left her. She got up and served him. 8:16When evening came, they brought to him many possessed with demons. He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick; 8:17that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: "He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases." 8:18Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave the order to depart to the other side.

8:19A scribe came, and said to him, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."

8:20Jesus said to him, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head."

8:21Another of his disciples said to him, "Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."

8:22But Jesus said to him, "Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead."

8:23When he got into a boat, his disciples followed him. 8:24Behold, a great tempest arose in the sea, so much that the boat was covered with the waves, but he was asleep. 8:25They came to him, and woke him up, saying, "Save us, Lord! We are dying!"

8:26He said to them, "Why are you fearful, oh you of little faith?" Then he got up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm.

8:27The men marveled, saying, "What kind of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"

8:28When he came to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, two people possessed by demons met him there, coming forth out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that no man could pass by that way. 8:29Behold, they cried out, saying, "What do we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?" 8:30Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding far away from them. 8:31The demons begged him, saying, "If you cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of pigs."

8:32He said to them, "Go!"

They came out, and went into the herd of pigs: and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea, and died in the water. 8:33Those who fed them fled, and went away into the city, and told everything, including what happened to those who were possessed with demons. 8:34Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus. When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their borders.

9:1He entered into a boat, and crossed over, and came into his own city. 9:2Behold, they brought to him a man who was paralyzed, lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, "Son, cheer up! Your sins are forgiven you."

9:3Behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, "This man blasphemes."

9:4Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, "Why do you think evil in your hearts? 9:5For which is easier, to say, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Get up, and walk?' 9:6But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins..." (then he said to the paralytic), "Get up, and take up your mat, and go up to your house."

9:7He arose and departed to his house. 9:8But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.

9:9As Jesus passed by from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office. He said to him, "Follow me." He got up and followed him. 9:10It happened as he reclined in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and reclined with Jesus and his disciples. 9:11When the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?"

9:12When Jesus heard it, he said to them, "Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do. 9:13But you go and learn what this means: 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

9:14Then John's disciples came to him, saying, "Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don't fast?"

9:15Jesus said to them, "Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast. 9:16No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for the patch would tear away from the garment, and a worse hole is made. 9:17Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and the skins ruined. No, they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved."

9:18While he told these things to them, behold, a ruler came and worshiped him, saying, "My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live."

9:19Jesus got up and followed him, as did his disciples. 9:20Behold, a woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years came behind him, and touched the tassels of his garment; 9:21for she said within herself, "If I just touch his garment, I will be made well."

9:22But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, "Daughter, cheer up! Your faith has made you well." And the woman was made well from that hour.

9:23When Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the flute players, and the crowd in noisy disorder, 9:24he said to them, "Make room, because the young lady isn't dead, but sleeping."

They were ridiculing him. 9:25But when the crowd was put out, he entered in, took her by the hand, and the young lady arose. 9:26The report of this went forth into all that land. 9:27As Jesus passed by from there, two blind men followed him, calling out and saying, "Have mercy on us, son of David!"

9:28When he had come into the house, the blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, "Do you believe that I am able to do this?"

They told him, "Yes, Lord."

9:29Then he touched their eyes, saying, "According to your faith be it done to you." 9:30Their eyes were opened. Jesus strictly charged them, saying, "See that no one knows about this." 9:31But they went out and spread abroad his fame in all that land.

9:32As they went forth, behold, there was brought to him a mute man who was demon possessed. 9:33When the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. The multitudes marveled, saying, "Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!"

9:34But the Pharisees said, "By the prince of the demons, he casts out demons."

9:35Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people. 9:36But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were weary and scattered, as sheep without a shepherd. 9:37Then he said to his disciples, "The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few. 9:38Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send forth laborers into his harvest."

10:1He called to himself his twelve disciples, and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every sickness. 10:2Now the names of the twelve apostles are these. The first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee; John, his brother; 10:3Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew, the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus; and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus; 10:4Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

10:5Jesus sent these twelve forth, and charged them, saying, "Don't go among the Gentiles, and don't enter into any city of the Samaritans. 10:6Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 10:7As you go, preach, saying, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!' 10:8Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, and cast out demons. Freely you received, so freely give. 10:9Don't take any gold, nor silver, nor brass in your money belts. 10:10Take no bag for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food. 10:11Into whatever city or village you enter, find out who in it is worthy; and stay there until you go on. 10:12As you enter into the household, greet it. 10:13If the household is worthy, let your peace come on it, but if it isn't worthy, let your peace return to you. 10:14Whoever doesn't receive you, nor hear your words, as you go forth out of that house or that city, shake off the dust from your feet. 10:15Most assuredly I tell you, It will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.

10:16"Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. 10:17But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they will scourge you. 10:18Yes, and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles. 10:19But when they deliver you up, don't be anxious how or what you will say, for it will be given you in that hour what you will say. 10:20For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.

10:21"Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death. 10:22You will be hated by all men for my name's sake, but he who endures to the end, the same will be saved. 10:23But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the next, for most assuredly I tell you, you will not have gone through the cities of Israel, until the Son of Man has come.

10:24"A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord. 10:25It is enough for the disciple that he be like his teacher, and the servant like his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more those of his household! 10:26Therefore don't be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed; and hidden that will not be known. 10:27What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the housetops. 10:28Don't be afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Rather, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.

10:29"Aren't two sparrows sold for an assarion? Not one of them falls on the ground apart from your Father's will, 10:30but the very hairs of your head are all numbered. 10:31Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows. 10:32Everyone therefore who confesses me before men, him I will also confess before my Father who is in heaven. 10:33But whoever denies me before men, him I will also deny before my Father who is in heaven.

10:34"Don't think that I came to send peace on the earth. I didn't come to send peace, but a sword. 10:35For I came to set a man at odds against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 10:36A man's foes will be those of his own household. 10:37He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me isn't worthy of me. 10:38He who doesn't take his cross and follow after me, isn't worthy of me. 10:39He who finds his life will lose it; and he who loses his life for my sake will find it. 10:40He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me. 10:41He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward: and he who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man's reward. 10:42Whoever gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, most assuredly I tell you he will in no way lose his reward."

11:1It happened that when Jesus had finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed there to teach and preach in their cities. 11:2Now when John heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples 11:3and said to him, "Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?"

11:4Jesus answered them, "Go and tell John the things which you hear and see: 11:5the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them. 11:6Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me."

11:7As these went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, "What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 11:8But what did you go out to see? A man in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in king's houses. 11:9But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet. 11:10For this is he, of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.' 11:11Most assuredly I tell you, among those who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer; yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he. 11:12From the days of John the Baptizer until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. 11:13For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. 11:14If you are willing to receive it, this is Elijah, who is to come. 11:15He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

11:16"But what will I compare this generation to? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, who call to their companions 11:17and say, 'We played the flute for you, and you didn't dance. We mourned for you, and you didn't lament.' 11:18For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon.' 11:19The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' But wisdom is justified by her children."

11:20Then he began to denounce the cities in which most of his mighty works were done, because they didn't repent. 11:21"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 11:22But I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than for you. 11:23You, Capernaum, who are exalted to Heaven, you will go down to Hades. For if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in you, it would have remained until this day. 11:24But I tell you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for you."

11:25At that time, Jesus answered, "I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to infants. 11:26Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight. 11:27All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows the Son, except the Father; neither does anyone know the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son wants to reveal him.

11:28"Come to me, all you who labor and are heavily burdened, and I will give you rest. 11:29Take my yoke on you, and learn from me, for I am humble and lowly in heart; and you will find rest for your souls. 11:30For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."

12:1At that time, Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain fields. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and to eat. 12:2But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, "Behold, your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath."

12:3But he said to them, "Haven't you read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him; 12:4how he entered into the house of God, and ate the show bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for those who were with him, but only for the priests? 12:5Or have you not read in the law, that on the Sabbath day, the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are guiltless? 12:6But I tell you that one greater than the temple is here. 12:7But if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the guiltless. 12:8For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath."

12:9He departed there, and went into their synagogue. 12:10And behold there was a man with a withered hand. They asked him, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?" that they might accuse him.

12:11He said to them, "What man is there among you, who has one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day, won't he grab on to it, and lift it out? 12:12How much, then, is a man of more value than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day." 12:13Then he told the man, "Stretch out your hand." He stretched it out; and it was restored whole, just like the other. 12:14But the Pharisees went out, and took counsel against him, how they might destroy him. 12:15Jesus, perceiving that, withdrew from there. Great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all, 12:16and charged them that they should not make him known: 12:17that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

 12:18"Behold, my servant whom I have chosen;
      My beloved in whom my soul is well pleased:

 I will put my Spirit on him.
      He will declare judgment to the Gentiles.

 12:19He will not strive, nor shout;
      Neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets.

 12:20He won't break a bruised reed.
      He won't quench a smoking flax,

 Until he sends forth judgment to victory.
      12:21In his name, the Gentiles will hope."

12:22Then there was brought to him one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, and he healed him, so that the blind and mute man both spoke and saw. 12:23All the multitudes were amazed, and said, "Can this be the son of David?" 12:24But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, "This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons."

12:25Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand. 12:26If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand? 12:27If I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges. 12:28But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come on you. 12:29Or how can one enter into the house of the strong man, and plunder his goods, except he first bind the strong man? Then he will plunder his house.

12:30"He who is not with me is against me, and he who doesn't gather with me, scatters. 12:31Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven men. 12:32Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come.

12:33"Either make the tree good, and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit. 12:34You offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. 12:35The good man out of his good treasure brings forth good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things. 12:36I tell you that every idle word that men speak, they will give account of it in the day of judgment. 12:37For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."

12:38Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered, saying, "Teacher, we want to see a sign from you."

12:39But he answered them, "An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there will no sign be given it but the sign of Jonah, the prophet. 12:40For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 12:41The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here. 12:42The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, someone greater than Solomon is here. 12:43But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of the man, passes through waterless places, seeking rest, and doesn't find it. 12:44Then he says, 'I will return into my house whence I came out,' and when he has come back, he finds it empty, swept, and put in order. 12:45Then he goes, and takes with himself seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first. Even so will it be also to this evil generation."

12:46While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, seeking to speak to him. 12:47One said to him, "Behold, your mother and your brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to you."

12:48But he answered him who told him, "Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?" 12:49He stretched forth his hand towards his disciples, and said, "Behold, my mother and my brothers! 12:50For whoever will do the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother."

13:1On that day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the seaside. 13:2Great multitudes gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat, and sat, and all the multitude stood on the beach. 13:3He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, "Behold, a farmer went forth to sow. 13:4As he sowed, some seeds fell by the roadside, and the birds came and devoured them. 13:5Others fell on rocky ground, where they didn't have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, because they had no depth of earth. 13:6When the sun had risen, they were scorched. Because they had no root, they withered away. 13:7Others fell on thorns. The thorns grew up and choked them: 13:8and others fell on good soil, and yielded fruit: some one hundred times, some sixty, and some thirty. 13:9He who has ears to hear, let him hear."

13:10The disciples came, and said to him, "Why do you speak to them in parables?"

13:11He answered them, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to them. 13:12For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have abundance, but whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he has. 13:13Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they don't see, and hearing, they don't hear, neither do they understand. 13:14In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, which says,

 'By hearing you will hear,
      And will in no way understand;

 Seeing you will see,
      And will in no way perceive:

 13:15For this people's heart has grown callous,
      Their ears are dull of hearing,
      Their eyes they have closed;

 Or else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes,
      Hear with their ears,
      Understand with their heart,

 And should turn again;
      And I would heal them.'

13:16"But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. 13:17For most assuredly I tell you that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them; and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them.

13:18"Hear, then, the parable of the farmer. 13:19When anyone hears the word of the kingdom, and doesn't understand it, the evil one comes, and snatches away that which has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown by the roadside. 13:20What was sown on the rocky places, this is he who hears the word, and immediately with joy receives it; 13:21yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately he stumbles. 13:22What was sown among the thorns, this is he who hears the word, but the cares of this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful. 13:23What was sown on the good ground, this is he who hears the word, and understands it, who most assuredly bears fruit, and brings forth, some one hundred times, some sixty, some thirty."

13:24He set another parable before them, saying, "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field, 13:25but while people slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel also among the wheat, and went away. 13:26But when the blade sprang up and brought forth fruit, then the darnel appeared also. 13:27The servants of the householder came and said to him, 'Sir, didn't you sow good seed in your field? Where did this darnel come from?'

13:28"He said to them, 'An enemy has done this.'

"The servants asked him, 'Do you want us to go and gather them up?'

13:29"But he said, 'No, lest perhaps while you gather up the darnel, you root up the wheat with them. 13:30Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers, "First, gather up the darnel, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn."'"

13:31He set another parable before them, saying, "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field; 13:32which indeed is smaller than all seeds. But when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches."

13:33He spoke another parable to them. "The Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, until it was all leavened."

13:34Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes; and without a parable, he didn't speak to them, 13:35that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,

 "I will open my mouth in parables;
      I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world."

13:36Then Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, "Explain to us the parable of the darnel of the field."

13:37He answered them, "He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man, 13:38the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; and the darnel are the sons of the evil one. 13:39The enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. 13:40As therefore the darnel is gathered up and burned with fire; so will it be in the end of this age. 13:41The Son of Man will send forth his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and those who do iniquity, 13:42and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth. 13:43Then the righteous will shine forth like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

13:44"The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found, and hid. In his joy, he goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field.

13:45"Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls, 13:46who having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47"Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet, that was cast into the sea, and gathered some fish of every kind, 13:48which, when it was filled, they drew up on the beach. They sat down, and gathered the good into containers, but the bad they threw away. 13:49So will it be in the end of the world. The angels will come forth, and separate the wicked from among the righteous, 13:50and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth." 13:51Jesus said to them, "Have you understood all these things?"

They answered him, "Yes, Lord."

13:52He said to them, "Therefore, every scribe who has been made a disciple to the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a householder, who brings forth out of his treasure new and old things."

13:53It happened that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed from there. 13:54Coming into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so much that they were astonished, and said, "Where did this man get this wisdom, and these mighty works? 13:55Isn't this the carpenter's son? Isn't his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, Joses, Simon, and Judas? 13:56Aren't all of his sisters with us? Where, then did this man get all of these things?" 13:57They were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, "A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and in his own house." 13:58He didn't do many mighty works there because of their unbelief.

14:1At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus, 14:2and said to his servants, "This is John the Baptizer. He is risen from the dead. That is why these powers work in him." 14:3For Herod had laid hold of John, and bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife. 14:4For John said to him, "It is not lawful for you to have her." 14:5When he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet. 14:6But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst, and pleased Herod. 14:7Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask. 14:8She, being put forward by her mother, said, "Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer."

14:9The king was grieved, but for the sake of his oaths, and of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded it to be given, 14:10and he sent and beheaded John in the prison. 14:11His head was brought on a platter, and given to the young lady: and she brought it to her mother. 14:12His disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it; and they went and told Jesus. 14:13Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat, to a desert place apart. When the multitudes heard it, they followed him on foot from the cities.

14:14Jesus went out, and he saw a great multitude. He had compassion on them, and healed their sick. 14:15When evening had come, his disciples came to him, saying, "This place is a desert, and the hour is already late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves food."

14:16But Jesus said to them, "They don't need to go away. You give them something to eat."

14:17They told him, "We only have here five loaves and two fish."

14:18He said, "Bring them here to me." 14:19He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes. 14:20They all ate, and were filled. They took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the broken pieces. 14:21Those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.

14:22Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat, and to go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 14:23After he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the mountain apart to pray. When evening had come, he was there alone. 14:24But the boat was now in the midst of the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary. 14:25In the fourth watch of the night Jesus came to them, walking on the sea. 14:26When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, "It is a ghost!" and they cried out for fear. 14:27But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying "Cheer up! I AM! Don't be afraid."

14:28Peter answered him and said, "Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the waters."

14:29He said, "Come!"

Peter went down from the boat, and walked on the waters to come to Jesus. 14:30But when he saw that the wind was strong, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, "Lord, save me!"

14:31Immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, took hold of him, and said to him, "You of little faith, why did you doubt?" 14:32When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased. 14:33Those who were in the boat came and worshiped him, saying, "You are truly the Son of God!"

14:34When they had crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret. 14:35When the men of that place recognized him, they sent into all that region round about, and brought to him all who were sick, 14:36and they begged him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment. As many as touched it were made whole.

15:1Then Pharisees and scribes come to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying, 15:2"Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don't wash their hands when they eat bread."

15:3He answered them, "Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition? 15:4For God commanded, 'Honor your father and your mother,' and, 'He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.' 15:5But you say, 'Whoever may tell his father or his mother, "Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is a gift devoted to God," 15:6he will not honor his father or mother.' You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition. 15:7You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying,

 15:8'These people draw near to me with their mouth,
      And honor me with their lips;
      But their heart is far from me.

 15:9But in vain do they worship me,
      Teaching as doctrine rules made by men.'"

15:10He called the multitude to himself, and said to them, "Hear, and understand. 15:11That which enters into the mouth doesn't defile the man; but that which proceeds out of the mouth, this defiles the man."

15:12Then the disciples came, and said to him, "Do you know that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard this saying?"

15:13But he answered, "Every plant which my heavenly Father didn't plant will be uprooted. 15:14Let them alone. They are blind guides of the blind. If the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit."

15:15Peter answered him, "Explain the parable to us."

15:16So Jesus said, "Do you also still not understand? 15:17Don't you understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the belly, and then out of the body? 15:18But the things which proceed out of the mouth come forth out of the heart, and they defile the man. 15:19For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false testimony, and blasphemies. 15:20These are the things which defile the man; but to eat with unwashed hands doesn't defile the man."

15:21Jesus went out from there, and withdrew into the parts of Tyre and Sidon. 15:22Behold, a Canaanite woman came out from those borders, and cried, saying, "Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of David! My daughter is severely demonized!"

15:23But he answered her not a word.

His disciples came and begged him, saying, "Send her away; for she cries after us."

15:24But he answered, "I wasn't sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel."

15:25But she came and worshiped him, saying, "Lord, help me."

15:26But he answered, "It is not appropriate to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs." 15:27But she said, "Yes, Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."

15:28Then Jesus answered her, "Woman, great is your faith! Be it done to you even as you desire." And her daughter was healed from that hour.

15:29Jesus departed there, and came near to the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and sat there. 15:30There came to him great multitudes, having with them the lame, blind, mute, maimed, and many others, and they put them down at his feet. He healed them, 15:31so that the multitude wondered when they saw the mute speaking, injured whole, lame walking, and blind seeing -- and they glorified the God of Israel.

15:32Jesus called his disciples to himself, and said, "I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat. I don't want to send them away fasting, or they might faint on the way."

15:33The disciples said to him, "Where should we get so many loaves in a desert place as to fill so great a multitude?"

15:34Jesus said to them, "How many loaves do you have?"

They said, "Seven, and a few small fish."

15:35He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground; 15:36and he took the seven loaves and the fish. He gave thanks and broke them, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes. 15:37They all ate, and were filled. They took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over. 15:38Those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children. 15:39He sent away the multitudes, and entered into the boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.

16:1The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and testing him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 16:2But he answered them, "When it is evening, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.' 16:3In the morning, 'It will be foul weather today, for the sky is red and threatening.' Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you can't discern the signs of the times. 16:4An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there will be no sign given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonah."

He left them, and departed. 16:5The disciples came to the other side and forgot to take bread. 16:6Jesus said to them, "Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees."

16:7They reasoned among themselves, saying, "We brought no bread."

16:8Jesus, perceiving it, said, "Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, 'because you have brought no bread?' 16:9Don't you yet perceive, neither remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up? 16:10Nor the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up? 16:11How is it that you don't perceive that I didn't speak to you concerning bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees."

16:12Then they understood that he didn't tell them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 16:13Now when Jesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, "Who do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?"

16:14They said, "Some say John the Baptizer, some, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets."

16:15He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?"

16:16Simon Peter answered, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."

16:17Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven. 16:18I also tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it. 16:19I will give to you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you will bind on earth will be bound in heaven; and whatever you will loose on earth will be loosed in heaven." 16:20Then he charged the disciples that they should tell no man that he is Jesus the Christ. 16:21From that time, Jesus began to show to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.

16:22Peter took him aside, and began to rebuke him, saying, "Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done to you."

16:23But he turned, and said to Peter, "Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling-block to me, for you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but the things of men." 16:24Then Jesus said to his disciples, "If any man desires to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 16:25For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it. 16:26For what will it profit a man, if he gains the whole world, and forfeits his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life? 16:27For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to everyone according to his deeds. 16:28Most assuredly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom."

17:1After six days, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, his brother, and brought them up into a high mountain by themselves. 17:2He was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as the light. 17:3Behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah talking with him. 17:4Peter answered, and said to Jesus, "Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, let's make three tents here: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah."

17:5While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. Behold, a voice came out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to him."

17:6When the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were very afraid. 17:7Jesus came and touched them and said, "Get up, and don't be afraid." 17:8Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone. 17:9As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, "Don't tell anyone what you saw, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead."

17:10His disciples asked him, saying, "Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?

17:11Jesus answered them, "Elijah indeed comes first, and will restore all things, 17:12but I tell you that Elijah has come already, and they didn't recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted to. Even so will the Son of Man also suffer by them." 17:13Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptizer.

17:14When they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling to him, saying, 17:15"Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic, and suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire, and often into the water. 17:16So I brought him to your disciples, and they could not cure him."

17:17Jesus answered, "Faithless and perverse generation! How long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him here to me." 17:18Jesus rebuked him, the demon went out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.

17:19Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, "Why weren't we able to cast it out?"

17:20He said to them, "Because of your unbelief. For most assuredly I tell you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, 'Move from here to there,' and it will move; and nothing will be impossible to you. 17:21But this kind doesn't go out except by prayer and fasting."

17:22While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, "The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, 17:23and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up."

They were exceedingly sorry. 17:24When they had come to Capernaum, those who collected the didrachmas came to Peter, and said, "Doesn't your teacher pay the didrachma?" 17:25He said, "Yes."

When he came into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, "What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their sons, or from strangers?"

17:26Peter said to him, "From strangers."

Jesus said to him, "Therefore the sons are exempt. 17:27But, lest we cause them to stumble, go to the sea, and cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. When you have opened his mouth, you will find a stater. Take that, and give it to them for me and you."

18:1In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, "Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?"

18:2Jesus called a little child to himself, and set him in the midst of them, 18:3and said, "Most assuredly I tell you, unless you turn, and become as little children, you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. 18:4Whoever therefore will humble himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. 18:5Whoever will receive one such little child in my name receives me, 18:6but whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him that a huge millstone should be hung around his neck, and that he should be sunk in the depths of the sea.

18:7"Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling! For it must be that the occasions come, but woe to that person through whom the occasion comes! 18:8If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire. 18:9If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire. 18:10See that you don't despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven. 18:11For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost.

18:12"What do you think? If a man has one hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, doesn't he leave the ninety-nine, go to the mountains, and seek that which has gone astray? 18:13If he happens to find it, most assuredly I tell you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray. 18:14Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.

18:15"If your brother sins against you, go, show him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained back your brother. 18:16But if he doesn't listen, take one or two more with you, that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. 18:17If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the assembly. If he refuses to hear the assembly also, let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector. 18:18Most assuredly I tell you, whatever things you will bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever things you will loose on earth will be loosed in heaven. 18:19Again, assuredly I tell you, that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven. 18:20For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of them."

18:21Then Peter came and said to him, "Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?"

18:22Jesus said to him, "I don't tell you until seven times, but, until seventy times seven. 18:23Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who wanted to reconcile accounts with his servants. 18:24When he had begun to reconcile, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents. 18:25But because he couldn't pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, with his wife, his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. 18:26The servant therefore fell down and kneeled before him, saying, 'Lord, have patience with me, and I will repay you all.' 18:27The lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.

18:28"But that servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, who owed him one hundred denarii, and he grabbed him, and took him by the throat, saying, 'Pay me what you owe!'

18:29"So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him, saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will repay you.' 18:30He would not, but went and cast him into prison, until he should pay back that which was due. 18:31So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were exceedingly sorry, and came and told to their lord all that was done. 18:32Then his lord called him in, and said to him, 'You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt, because you begged me. 18:33Shouldn't you also have had mercy on your fellow servant, even as I had mercy on you?' 18:34His lord was angry, and delivered him to the tormentors, until he should pay all that was due to him. 18:35So will my heavenly Father also do to you, if you don't each forgive his brother from your hearts for his misdeeds."

19:1It happened when Jesus had finished these words, he departed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan. 19:2Great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there. 19:3Pharisees came to him, testing him, and saying, "Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?"

19:4He answered, "Haven't you read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female, 19:5and said, 'For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife; and the two will become one flesh?' 19:6So that they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, don't let man tear apart."

19:7They asked him, "Why then did Moses command us to give her a bill of divorce, and divorce her?"

19:8He said to them, "Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it has not been so. 19:9I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery; and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery."

19:10His disciples said to him, "If this is the case of the man with his wife, it is not expedient to marry."

19:11But he said to them, "Not all men can receive this saying, but those to whom it is given. 19:12For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it."

19:13Then little children were brought to him, that he should lay his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them. 19:14But Jesus said, "Allow the little children, and don't forbid them to come to me; for to such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven." 19:15He laid his hands on them, and departed from there.

19:16Behold, one came to him and said, "Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?"

19:17He said to him, "Why do you call me good? No one is good but one, that is, God. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments."

19:18He said to him, "Which ones?"

Jesus said, "You shall not kill. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not offer false testimony. 19:19Honor your father and mother. And, you shall love your neighbor as yourself."

19:20The young man said to him, "All these things I have observed from my youth. What do I still lack?"

19:21Jesus said to him, "If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me." 19:22But when the young man heard the saying, he went away sad, for he was one who had great possessions. 19:23Jesus said to his disciples, "Most assuredly I say to you, a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with difficulty. 19:24Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

19:25When the disciples heard it, they were exceedingly astonished, saying, "Who then can be saved?"

19:26Looking at them, Jesus said, "With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible."

19:27Then Peter answered, "Behold, we have left everything, and followed you. What then will we have?"

19:28Jesus said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, that you who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 19:29Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, will receive one hundred times, and will inherit eternal life. 19:30But many will be last who are first; and first who are last.

20:1"For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. 20:2When he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard. 20:3He went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace. 20:4To them he said, 'You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.' So they went their way. 20:5Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise. 20:6About the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle. He said to them, 'Why do you stand here all day idle?'

20:7"They said to him, 'Because no one has hired us.'

"He said to them, 'You also go into the vineyard, and you will receive whatever is right.' 20:8When evening had come, the lord of the vineyard said to his steward, 'Call the laborers and pay them their hire, beginning from the last to the first.'

20:9"When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius. 20:10When the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise each received a denarius. 20:11When they received it, they murmured against the master of the household, 20:12saying, 'These last have spent one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat!'

20:13"But he answered one of them, 'Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Didn't you agree with me for a denarius? 20:14Take that which is yours, and go your way. It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you. 20:15Isn't it lawful for me to do what I want to with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?' 20:16So the last will be first, and the first last. For many are called, but few are chosen."

20:17As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them, 20:18"Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, 20:19and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock, to scourge, and to crucify; and the third day he will be raised up."

20:20Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him. 20:21He said to her, "What do you want?"

She said to him, "Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your right hand, and one on your left hand, in your kingdom."

20:22But Jesus answered, "You don't know what you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?"

They said to him, "We are able."

20:23He said to them, "You will indeed drink my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give; but it is for whom it has been prepared by my Father."

20:24When the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation concerning the two brothers.

20:25But Jesus called them to himself, and said, "You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. 20:26It shall not be so among you, but whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant. 20:27Whoever desires to be first among you shall be your bondservant, 20:28even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."

20:29As they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. 20:30Behold, two blind men sitting by the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, "Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!" 20:31The multitude rebuked them, telling them that they should be quiet, but they cried out even more, "Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!"

20:32Jesus stood still, and called them, and asked, "What do you want me to do for you?"

20:33They told him, "Lord, that our eyes may be opened."

20:34Jesus, being moved with compassion, touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received their sight, and they followed him.

21:1When they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethsphage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, 21:2saying to them, "Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them, and bring them to me. 21:3If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, 'The Lord needs them,' and immediately he will send them."

21:4All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,

 21:5"Tell the daughter of Zion,
      Behold, your King comes to you,
      Humble, and riding on a donkey,
      On a colt, the foal of a donkey."

21:6The disciples went, and did just as Jesus commanded them, 21:7and brought the donkey and the colt, and laid their clothes on them; and he sat on them. 21:8A very great multitude spread their clothes on the road. Others cut branches from the trees, and spread them on the road. 21:9The multitudes who went before him, and who followed, cried, "Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"

21:10When he had come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying, "Who is this?" 21:11The multitudes said, "This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee."

21:12Jesus entered into the temple of God, and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the money-changers' tables, and the seats of those who sold the doves. 21:13He said to them, "It is written, 'My house will be called a house of prayer,' but you have made it a den of robbers!"

21:14The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them. 21:15But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children who were crying in the temple and saying, "Hosanna to the son of David!" they were moved with indignation, 21:16and said to him, "Do you hear what these are saying?"

Jesus said to them, "Yes. Did you never read, 'Out of the mouth of babes and nursing babies you have perfected praise?'"

21:17He left them, and went forth out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there. 21:18Now in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry. 21:19Seeing a fig tree by the road, he came to it, and found nothing on it but leaves. He said to it, "Let there be no fruit from you forever!"

Immediately the fig tree withered away. 21:20When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, "How did the fig tree immediately wither away?"

21:21Jesus answered them, "Most assuredly I tell you, if you have faith, and don't doubt, you will not only do what is done to the fig tree, but even if you will tell this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' it will be done. 21:22All things, whatever you will ask in prayer, believing, you will receive."

21:23When he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, "By what authority do you do these things? Who gave you this authority?"

21:24Jesus answered them, "I also will ask you one question, which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things. 21:25The baptism of John, where was it from? From heaven or from men?"

They reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we will say, 'From heaven,' he will ask us, 'Why then did you not believe him?' 21:26But if we will say, 'From men,' we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet." 21:27They answered Jesus, and said, "We don't know."

He also said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things. 21:28But what do you think? A man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said, 'Son, go work today in my vineyard.' 21:29He answered, 'I will not,' but afterward he repented himself, and went. 21:30He came to the second, and said likewise. He answered, 'I go, sir,' but he didn't go. 21:31Which of the two did the will of his father?"

They said to him, "The first."

Jesus said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering into the kingdom of God before you. 21:32For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you didn't believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. When you saw it, you didn't even repent afterward, that you might believe him.

21:33"Hear another parable. There was a man who was a master of a household, who planted a vineyard, set a hedge about it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, leased it out to farmers, and went into another country. 21:34When the season for the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruit. 21:35The farmers took his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned another. 21:36Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did to them in like manner. 21:37But afterward he sent to them his son, saying, 'They will respect my son.' 21:38But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and seize his inheritance.' 21:39So they took him, and threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him. 21:40When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?"

21:41They told him, "He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will give him the fruit in its season."

21:42Jesus said to them, "Did you never read in the Scriptures,

 'The stone which the builders rejected,
      The same was made the head of the corner.

 This was from the Lord.
      It is marvelous in our eyes?'

21:43"Therefore I tell you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation bringing forth its fruits. 21:44He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but on whoever it will fall, it will scatter him as dust."

21:45When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke about them. 21:46When they sought to lay hold on him, they feared the multitudes, because they took him for a prophet.

22:1Jesus answered and spoke again in parables to them, saying, 22:2"The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who made a marriage feast for his son, 22:3and sent forth his servants to call those who were invited to the marriage feast, but they would not come. 22:4Again he sent forth other servants, saying, 'Tell those who are invited, "Behold, I have made ready my dinner. My oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. Come to the marriage feast!"' 22:5But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise, 22:6and the rest grabbed his servants, and treated them shamefully, and killed them. 22:7But the king was angry, and he sent his armies, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.

22:8"Then he said to his servants, 'The wedding is ready, but those who were invited weren't worthy. 22:9Go therefore to the intersections of the highways, and as many as you may find, invite to the marriage feast.' 22:10Those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and good. The wedding was filled with guests. 22:11But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who didn't have on wedding clothing, 22:12and he said to him, 'Friend, how did you come in here not having wedding clothing?' He was speechless. 22:13Then the king said to the servants, 'Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and throw him into the outer darkness; there is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.' 22:14For many are called, but few chosen."

22:15Then the Pharisees went and took counsel how they might entrap him in his talk. 22:16They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know that you are honest, and teach the way of God in truth, no matter who you teach, for you aren't partial to anyone. 22:17Tell us therefore, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"

22:18But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, "Why do you test me, you hypocrites? 22:19Show me the tax money."

They brought to him a denarius.

22:20He asked them, "Whose is this image and inscription?"

22:21They said to him, "Caesar's."

Then he said to them, "Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

22:22When they heard it, they marveled, and left him, and went away.

22:23On that day Sadducees (those who say that there is no resurrection) came to him. They asked him, 22:24saying, "Teacher, Moses said, 'If a man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed for his brother.' 22:25Now there were with us seven brothers. The first married and died, and having no seed left his wife to his brother. 22:26In like manner the second also, and the third, to the seventh. 22:27After them all, the woman died. 22:28In the resurrection therefore, whose wife will she be of the seven? For they all had her."

22:29But Jesus answered them, "You are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. 22:30For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like God's angels in heaven. 22:31But concerning the resurrection of the dead, haven't you read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, 22:32'I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?' God is not the God of the dead, but of the living."

22:33When the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching. 22:34But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, gathered themselves together. 22:35One of them, a lawyer, asked him a question, testing him. 22:36"Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?"

22:37Jesus said to him, "'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.' 22:38This is the first and great commandment. 22:39A second likewise is this, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' 22:40The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments."

22:41Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question, 22:42saying, "What do you think of the Christ? Whose son is he?"

They said to him, "Of David."

22:43He said to them, "How then does David in the Spirit call him Lord, saying,

 22:44'The Lord said to my Lord,
      Sit on my right hand,
      Until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet?'

22:45"If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?"

22:46No one was able to answer him a word, neither dared any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.

23:1Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples, 23:2saying, "The scribes and the Pharisees sat on Moses' seat. 23:3All things therefore whatever they tell you to observe, observe and do, but don't do their works; for they say, and don't do. 23:4For they bind heavy burdens that are grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them. 23:5But all their works they do to be seen by men. They make their phylacteries broad, enlarge the fringes of their garments, 23:6and love the chief place at feasts, the chief seats in the synagogues, 23:7the salutations in the marketplaces, and to be called 'Rabbi, Rabbi' by men. 23:8But don't you be called 'Rabbi,' for one is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers. 23:9Call no man on the earth your father, for one is your Father, he who is in heaven. 23:10Neither be called masters, for one is your master, the Christ. 23:11But he who is greatest among you will be your servant. 23:12Whoever will exalt himself will be humbled, and whoever will humble himself will be exalted.

23:13"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows' houses, and as a pretense you make long prayers. Therefore you will receive greater condemnation.

23:14"But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you don't enter in yourselves, neither do you allow those who are entering in to enter. 23:15Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much of a son of Gehenna as yourselves.

23:16"Woe to you, you blind guides, who say, 'Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor.' 23:17You blind fools! For which is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold? 23:18'Whoever will swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever will swear by the gift that is on it, he is a debtor.' 23:19You blind fools! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift? 23:20He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it, and by everything on it. 23:21He who swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him who is living in it. 23:22He who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits on it.

23:23"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, and have left undone the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. But you ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone. 23:24You blind guides, who strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel!

23:25"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness. 23:26You blind Pharisee, first clean the inside of the cup and of the platter, that the outside of it may become clean also.

23:27"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitened tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. 23:28Even so you also outwardly appear righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

23:29"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the tombs of the righteous, 23:30and say, 'If we had been in the days of our fathers, we wouldn't have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' 23:31Therefore you testify to yourselves that you are sons of those who killed the prophets. 23:32Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers. 23:33You serpents, you offspring of vipers, how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna? 23:34Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets, wise men, and scribes. Some of them will you kill and crucify; and some of them will you scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city; 23:35that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar. 23:36Most assuredly I tell you, all these things will come on this generation.

23:37"Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often would I have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you would not! 23:38Behold, your house is left to you desolate. 23:39For I tell you, you will not see me from now on, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.'"

24:1Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way. His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple. 24:2But he answered them, "Don't you see all of these things? Most assuredly I tell you, there will not be left here one stone on another, that will not be thrown down."

24:3As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, "Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign of your coming, and of the end of the world?"

24:4Jesus answered them, "Be careful that no one leads you astray. 24:5For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am the Christ,' and will lead many astray. 24:6You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you aren't troubled, for all this must happen, but the end is not yet. 24:7For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places. 24:8But all these things are the beginning of birth pains. 24:9Then they will deliver you up to oppression, and will kill you. You will be hated by all of the nations for my name's sake. 24:10Then many will stumble, and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another. 24:11Many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray. 24:12Because iniquity will be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold. 24:13But he who endures to the end, the same will be saved. 24:14This gospel of the kingdom will be preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.

24:15When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand), 24:16then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. 24:17Let him who is on the housetop not go down to take out things that are in his house. 24:18Let him who is in the field not return back to take his cloak. 24:19But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days! 24:20Pray that your flight will not be in the winter, nor on a Sabbath, 24:21for then will be great oppression, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever will be. 24:22Unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved. But for the elect's sake, those days will be shortened.

24:23"Then if any man tells you, 'Behold, here is the Christ,' or, 'There,' don't believe it. 24:24For there will arise false Christs, and false prophets, and they will show great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect.

24:25"Behold, I have told you beforehand. 24:26If therefore they tell you, 'Behold, he is in the wilderness!' don't go out; 'Behold, he is in the inner chambers,' don't believe it. 24:27For as the lightning comes forth from the east, and is seen even to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 24:28For wherever the carcass is, there will the vultures be gathered together. 24:29But immediately after the oppression of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light, the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken; 24:30and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky. Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power and great glory. 24:31He will send forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.

24:32"Now from the fig tree learn her parable. When its branch has now become tender, and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near. 24:33Even so you also, when you see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. 24:34Most assuredly I tell you, this generation will not pass away, until all these things are accomplished. 24:35Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. 24:36But no one knows of that day and hour, not even the angels of heaven, but my Father only.

24:37"As the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 24:38For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, 24:39and they didn't know until the flood came, and took them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 24:40Then two men will be in the field: one will be taken and one will be left; 24:41two women grinding at the mill, one will be taken and one will be left. 24:42Watch therefore, for you don't know in what hour your Lord comes. 24:43But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into. 24:44Therefore also be ready, for in an hour that you don't expect, the Son of Man will come.

24:45"Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has set over his household, to give them their food in due season? 24:46Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes. 24:47Most assuredly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has. 24:48But if that evil servant should say in his heart, 'My lord is delaying his coming,' 24:49and began to beat his fellow-servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, 24:50the lord of that servant will come in a day when he doesn't expect it, and in an hour when he doesn't know it, 24:51and will cut him in pieces, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites; there is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.

25:1"Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom. 25:2Five of them were foolish, and five were wise. 25:3Those who were foolish, when they took their lamps, took no oil with them, 25:4but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. 25:5Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept. 25:6But at midnight there was a cry, 'Behold! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!' 25:7Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. 25:8The foolish said to the wise, 'Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.' 25:9But the wise answered, saying, 'What if there will not be enough for us and you? You go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.' 25:10While they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. 25:11Afterward the other virgins also came, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us.' 25:12But he answered, 'Most assuredly I tell you, I don't know you.' 25:13Watch therefore, for you don't know the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.

25:14"For it is like a man, going into another country, who called his own servants, and delivered his goods to them. 25:15To one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his own ability, and he went on his journey. 25:16Immediately he who received the five talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents. 25:17In like manner he also who got the two gained another two. 25:18But he who received the one went away and dug in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

25:19"Now after a long time the lord of those servants came, and reconciled accounts with them. 25:20He who received the five talents came and brought another five talents, saying, 'Lord, you delivered to me five talents. Behold, I have gained another five talents besides them.'

25:21"His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'

25:22"He also who got the two talents came and said, 'Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I have gained another two talents besides them.'

25:23"His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'

25:24"He also who had received the one talent came and said, 'Lord, I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter. 25:25I was afraid, and went away and hid your talent in the earth. Behold, you have your own.'

25:26"But his lord answered him, 'You wicked and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I didn't sow, and gather where I didn't scatter. 25:27You ought therefore to have deposited my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received back my own with interest. 25:28Take away therefore the talent from him, and give it to him who has the ten talents. 25:29For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who has not, even that which he has will be taken away. 25:30Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness, where there will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.'

25:31"But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory. 25:32Before him all the nations will be gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. 25:33He will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. 25:34Then the King will tell those on his right hand, 'Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; 25:35for I was hungry, and you gave me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you took me in; 25:36naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you visited me; I was in prison, and you came to me.'

25:37"Then the righteous will answer him, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you; or thirsty, and give you a drink? 25:38When did we see you as a stranger, and take you in; or naked, and clothe you? 25:39When did we see you sick, or in prison, and come to you?'

25:40"The King will answer them, 'Most assuredly I tell you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.' 25:41Then will he say also to those on the left hand, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels; 25:42for I was hungry, and you didn't give me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink; 25:43I was a stranger, and you didn't take me in; naked, and you didn't clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you didn't visit me.'

25:44"Then they will also answer, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not help you?'

25:45"Then will he answer them, saying, 'Most assuredly I tell you, inasmuch as you didn't do it to one of these least, you didn't do it to me.' 25:46These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."

26:1It happened, when Jesus had finished all these words, that he said to his disciples, 26:2"You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified."

26:3Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas. 26:4They took counsel together that they might take Jesus by deceit, and kill him. 26:5But they said, "Not during the feast, lest a riot occur among the people."

26:6Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, 26:7a woman came to him having an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table. 26:8But when his disciples saw it, they were indignant, saying, "Why this waste? 26:9For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor."

26:10But Jesus, knowing this, said to them, "Why do you trouble the woman? For she has done a good work for me. 26:11For you always have the poor with you; but you don't always have me. 26:12For in that she poured this ointment on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial. 26:13Most assuredly I tell you, wherever this gospel will be preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of for a memorial of her."

26:14Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests, 26:15and said, "What are you willing to give me, and I will deliver him to you?" They weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver. 26:16From that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17Now on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, "Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?"

26:18He said, "Go into the city to a certain person, and tell him, 'The Teacher says, "My time is at hand. I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples."'"

26:19The disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover. 26:20Now when evening had come, he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples. 26:21As they were eating, he said, "Most assuredly I tell you that one of you will betray me."

26:22They were exceedingly sorrowful, and each began to ask him, "It isn't me, is it, Lord?"

26:23He answered, "He who dipped his hand with me in the dish, the same will betray me. 26:24The Son of Man goes, even as it is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born."

26:25Judas, who betrayed him, answered, "It isn't me, is it, Rabbi?"

He said to him, "You said it."

26:26As they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks for it, and broke it. He gave to the disciples, and said, "Take, eat; this is my body." 26:27He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, "Drink all of it, 26:28for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins. 26:29But I tell you that I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on, until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's kingdom." 26:30When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.

26:31Then Jesus said to them, "All of you will be offended by me tonight, for it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered abroad.' 26:32But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee."

26:33But Peter answered him, "Even if all will be offended by you, I will never be offended."

26:34Jesus said to him, "Most assuredly I tell you, that tonight, before the cock crows, you will deny me three times."

26:35Peter said to him, "Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you." All of the disciples also said likewise.

26:36Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples, "Sit here, while I go there and pray." 26:37He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled. 26:38Then he said to them, "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch with me."

26:39He went forward a little, fell on his face, and prayed, saying, "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I desire, but what you desire."

26:40He came to the disciples, and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, "What, couldn't you watch with me for one hour? 26:41Watch and pray, that you don't enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."

26:42Again, a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, "My Father, if this cup can't pass away from me unless I drink it, your desire be done." 26:43He came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy. 26:44He left them again, went away, and prayed a third time, saying the same words. 26:45Then he came to his disciples, and said to them, "Sleep on now, and take your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. 26:46Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand."

26:47While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priest and elders of the people. 26:48Now he who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, "Whoever I will kiss, that is he. Take him." 26:49Immediately he came to Jesus, and said, "Hail, Rabbi!" and kissed him.

26:50Jesus said to him, "Friend, why are you here?" Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. 26:51Behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and struck off his ear. 26:52Then Jesus said to him, "Put your sword back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the sword. 26:53Or do you think that I can't ask my Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels? 26:54How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?"

26:55In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, "Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me. 26:56But all this has happened, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled."

Then all the disciples left him, and fled. 26:57Those who had taken Jesus led him away to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together. 26:58But Peter followed him from a distance, to the court of the high priest, and entered in and sat with the officers, to see the end. 26:59Now the chief priests, the elders, and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to death; 26:60and they found none. Even though many false witnesses came forward, they found none. But at last two false witnesses came forward, 26:61and said, "This man said, 'I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.'"

26:62The high priest stood up, and answered him, "Have you no answer? What is this that these testify against you?" 26:63But Jesus held his peace. The high priest answered him, "I adjure you by the living God, that you tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God."

26:64Jesus said to him, "You have said it. Nevertheless, I tell you, henceforth you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of the sky."

26:65Then the high priest tore his clothing, saying, "He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy. 26:66What do you think?"

They answered, "He is worthy of death!" 26:67Then they spit in his face and beat him with their fists, and some slapped him, 26:68saying, "Prophesy to us, you Christ! Who hit you?"

26:69Now Peter was sitting outside in the court, and a maid came to him, saying, "You were also with Jesus, the Galilean!"

26:70But he denied before them all, saying, "I don't know what you are talking about."

26:71When he had gone out onto the porch, someone else saw him, and said to those who were there, "This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth."

26:72Again he denied with an oath, "I don't know the man."

26:73After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter, "Surely you are also one of them, for your speech makes you known."

26:74Then began he to curse and to swear, "I don't know the man!"

Immediately the cock crowed. 26:75Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him, "Before the cock crows, you will deny me three times." He went out and wept bitterly.

27:1Now when morning had come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death: 27:2and they bound him, and led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor. 27:3Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, felt remorse, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 27:4saying, "I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood."

But they said, "What is that to us? You see to it."

27:5He threw down the pieces of silver in the sanctuary, and departed. He went away and hanged himself. 27:6The chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, "It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood." 27:7They took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in. 27:8Therefore that field was called "The Field of Blood" to this day. 27:9Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,

 "They took the thirty pieces of silver,
      The price on him upon whom a price had been set,
      Whom some of the children of Israel priced,

 27:10And they gave them for the potter's field,
      As the Lord commanded me."

27:11Now Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, "Are you the King of the Jews?"

Jesus said to him, "So you say."

27:12When he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. 27:13Then Pilate said to him, "Don't you hear how many things they testify against you?"

27:14He gave him no answer, not even one word, so that the governor marveled greatly. 27:15Now at the feast the governor used to release to the multitude one prisoner, whom they wanted. 27:16They had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas. 27:17When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, "Whom do you want me to release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?" 27:18For he knew that because of envy they had delivered him up.

27:19While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, "Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him." 27:20Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that they should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. 27:21But the governor answered them, "Which of the two do you want me to release to you?"

They said, "Barabbas!" 27:22Pilate said to them, "What then will I do to Jesus, who is called Christ?"

They all said to him, "Let him be crucified!"

27:23But the governor said, "Why? What evil has he done?"

But they cried out exceedingly, saying, "Let him be crucified!"

27:24So when Pilate saw that nothing was gained, but rather that a disturbance was starting, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, "I am innocent of the blood of this righteous person. You see to it."

27:25All the people answered, "May his blood be on us, and on our children!"

27:26Then he released to them Barabbas, but Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified. 27:27Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium, and gathered to him the whole cohort. 27:28They stripped him, and put a scarlet robe on him. 27:29They braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they kneeled down before him, and mocked him, saying, "Hail, King of the Jews!" 27:30They spat on him, and took the reed and struck him on the head. 27:31When they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away to crucify him.

27:32As they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelled him to go with them, that he might carry his cross. 27:33They came to a place called "Golgotha," that is to say, "The place of a skull." 27:34They gave him sour wine to drink mixed with gall. When he had tasted it, he would not drink. 27:35When they had crucified him, they divided his clothing among them, casting lots, 27:36and they sat and watched him there. 27:37They set up over his head his accusation written, "THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS."

27:38Then there were two robbers crucified with him, one on his right hand and one on the left. 27:39Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads, 27:40and saying, "You who destroy the temple, and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!"

27:41Likewise the chief priests also mocking, with the scribes, the Pharisees, and the elders, said, 27:42"He saved others, but he can't save himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him. 27:43He trusts in God. Let him deliver him now, if he wants him; for he said, 'I am the Son of God.'" 27:44The robbers also who were crucified with him cast on him the same reproach.

27:45Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour. 27:46About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?" That is, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"

27:47Some of them who stood there, when they heard it, said, "This man calls Elijah."

27:48Immediately one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him a drink. 27:49The rest said, "Let him be. Let's see whether Elijah comes to save him."

27:50Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up his spirit. 27:51Behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were split. 27:52The tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised; 27:53and coming forth out of the tombs after his resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many. 27:54Now the centurion, and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and the things that were done, feared exceedingly, saying, "Truly this was the Son of God."

27:55Many women were there watching from afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him, 27:56among whom was Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. 27:57When evening had come, there came a rich man from Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple. 27:58This man went to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up. 27:59Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, 27:60and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, and departed. 27:61Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb. 27:62Now on the next day, which is the day after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together to Pilate, 27:63saying, "Sir, we remember what that deceiver said while he was still alive: 'After three days I will rise again.' 27:64Command therefore that the tomb be made secure until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples come at night and steal him away, and tell the people, 'He is risen from the dead;' and the last deception will be worse than the first."

27:65Pilate said to them, "You have a guard. Go, make it as secure as you can." 27:66So they went, and made the tomb secure, sealing the stone, the guard being with them.

28:1Now after the Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb. 28:2Behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from the sky, and came and rolled away the stone from the door, and sat on it. 28:3His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow. 28:4For fear of him, the guards shook, and became like dead men. 28:5The angel answered the women, "Don't be afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus, who has been crucified. 28:6He is not here, for he has risen, just like he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was lying. 28:7Go quickly and tell his disciples, 'He has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee; there you will see him.' Behold, I have told you."

28:8They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to bring his disciples word. 28:9As they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, "Rejoice!"

They came and took hold of his feet, and worshiped him.

28:10Then Jesus said to them, "Don't be afraid. Go tell my brothers that they may go into Galilee, and there they will see me."

28:11Now while they were going, behold, some of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all the things that had happened. 28:12When they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave a large amount of silver to the soldiers, 28:13saying, "Say that his disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept. 28:14If this comes to the governor's ears, we will persuade him and make you free of worry." 28:15So they took the money and did as they were told. This saying was spread abroad among the Jews, and continues until this day. 28:16But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had sent them. 28:17When they saw him, they bowed down to him, but some doubted. 28:18Jesus came to them and spoke to them, saying, "All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth. 28:19Go, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, 28:20teaching them to observe all things which I commanded you. Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age." Amen.

Notes:

[1] back to 1:1 Christ (Greek) and Messiah (Hebrew) both mean "Anointed One"

[2] back to 1:16 "Jesus" is a Greek variant of the Jewish name "Yehoshua," which means "Yah saves." "Jesus" is also the masculine form of "Yeshu'ah," which means "Salvation."

[3] back to 2:1 The word for "wise men" (magoi) can also mean teachers, priests, physicians, astrologers, seers, interpreters of dreams, or sorcerers.

[4] back to 5:18 literally, iota

[5] back to 5:18 serif

[6] back to 5:22 "Raca" is an Aramaic insult, related to the word for "empty" and conveying the idea of empty-headedness.

[7] back to 5:22 Gehenna is another name for Hell that implies a burning garbage dump with dead bodies in it.

[8] back to 5:26 Literally, kodrantes. A kodrantes was a small copper coin worth about 2 lepta (widow's mites) -- not enough to buy very much of anything.

[9] back to 10:29 An assarion is a small coin worth one tenth of a drachma or a sixteenth of a denarius (approximately the wages of one half hour of agricultural labor).

[10] back to 13:25 darnel is a weed grass (probably bearded darnel or Lolium temulentum) that looks very much like wheat until it is mature, when the difference becomes very apparent.

[11] back to 13:33 Literally, satas. 3 satas = about 0.5 bushel or 22 litres

[12] back to 14:27 see Exodus 3:14.

[13] back to 17:24 A didrachma is a Greek silver coin worth 2 drachmas, about as much as 2 Roman denarii, or about 2 days wages. It was commonly used to pay the half-shekel temple tax, because 2 drachmas were worth one half shekel of silver.

[14] back to 17:27 A stater is a silver coin equivalent to four Attic or two Alexandrian drachmas, or a Jewish shekel: just exactly enough to cover the half-shekel Temple Tax for two people.

[15] back to 18:9 or, Hell

[16] back to 18:24 Ten thousand talents represents an extremely large sum of money, equivalent to about 60,000,000 denarii, where one denarius was typical of one day's wages for agricultural labor.

[17] back to 18:28 100 denarii was about one sixtieth of a talent.

[18] back to 20:2 A denarius is a silver Roman coin worth 1/25th of a Roman aureus. This was a common wage for a day of farm labor.

[19] back to 23:14 Some Greek manuscripts reverse the order of verses 13 and 14.

[20] back to 23:23 cumin is an aromatic seed from Cuminum cyminum, resembling caraway in flavor and appearance. It is used as a spice.

[21] back to 24:34 The word for "generation" (genea) can also be translated as "race."




The Gospel According to Mark

1:1The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. 1:2As it is written in the prophets,

 "Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
      Who will prepare your way before you.

 1:3The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
      'Make ready the way of the Lord!
      Make his paths straight!'"

1:4John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching the baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins. 1:5There went out to him all the country of Judea, and all those of Jerusalem. They were baptized by him in the Jordan river, confessing their sins. 1:6John was clothed with camel's hair and a leather belt around his loins. He ate locusts and wild honey. 1:7He preached, saying, "After me comes he who is mightier than I, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loosen. 1:8I baptized you in water, but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit."

1:9It happened in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan. 1:10Immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens parting, and the Spirit descending on him like a dove. 1:11A voice came out of the sky, "You are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

1:12Immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness. 1:13He was there in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals; and the angels ministered to him.

1:14Now after John was taken into custody, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, 1:15and saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand! Repent, and believe in the gospel."

1:16Passing along by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew the brother of Simon casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen. 1:17Jesus said to them, "Come after me, and I will make you into fishers for men."

1:18Immediately they left their nets, and followed him. 1:19Going on a little further from there, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, who were also in the boat mending the nets. 1:20Immediately he called them, and they left their father, Zebedee, in the boat with the hired servants, and went after him. 1:21They went into Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught. 1:22They were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes. 1:23Immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out, 1:24saying, "Ha! What do we have to do with you, Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!"

1:25Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be quiet, and come out of him!"

1:26The unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him. 1:27They were all amazed, so that they questioned among themselves, saying, "What is this? A new teaching? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him!" 1:28The report of him went out immediately everywhere into all the region of Galilee and its surrounding area.

1:29Immediately, when they had come out of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 1:30Now Simon's wife's mother lay sick with a fever, and immediately they told him about her. 1:31He came and took her by the hand, and raised her up. The fever left her, and she served them. 1:32At evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were sick, and those who were possessed by demons. 1:33All the city was gathered together at the door. 1:34He healed many who were sick with various diseases, and cast out many demons. He didn't allow the demons to speak, because they knew him.

1:35Early in the night, he rose up and went out, and departed into a desert place, and there prayed. 1:36Simon and those who were with him followed after him; 1:37and they found him, and told him, "Everyone is looking for you."

1:38He said to them, "Let's go elsewhere into the next towns, that I may preach there also, for to this end I came forth." 1:39He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.

1:40There came to him a leper, begging him, kneeling down to him, and saying to him, "If you want to, you can make me clean."

1:41Being moved with compassion, he stretched forth his hand, and touched him, and said to him, "I want to. Be made clean." 1:42When he had said this, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was made clean. 1:43He strictly charged him, and immediately sent him out, 1:44and said to him, "See you say nothing to anybody, but go show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them."

1:45But he went out, and began to proclaim it much, and to spread about the matter, so that Jesus could no more openly enter into a city, but was outside in desert places: and they came to him from everywhere.

2:1When he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was heard that he was in the house. 2:2Immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no more room, not even around the door; and he spoke the word to them. 2:3Four people came, carrying a paralytic to him. 2:4When they could not come near to him for the crowd, they removed the roof where he was. When they had broken it up, they let down the mat that the paralytic was lying on. 2:5Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, "Son, your sins are forgiven you."

2:6But there were some of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts, 2:7"Why does this man speak blasphemies like that? Who can forgive sins but God alone?"

2:8Immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, "Why do you reason these things in your hearts? 2:9Which is easier, to tell the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Arise, and take up your bed, and walk?' 2:10But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins" -- he said to the paralytic -- 2:11"I tell you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your house."

2:12He arose, and immediately took up the mat, and went out in front of them all; so that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, "We never saw anything like this!"

2:13He went out again by the seaside. All the multitude came to him, and he taught them. 2:14As he passed by, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the place of toll, and he said to him, "Follow me." And he arose and followed him.

2:15It happened, that he was reclining at the table in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him. 2:16The scribes and the Pharisees, when they saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, "Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?"

2:17When Jesus heard it, he said to them, "Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

2:18John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came and asked him, "Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don't fast?"

2:19Jesus said to them, "Can the sons of the bride chamber fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they can't fast. 2:20But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then will they fast in that day. 2:21No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, or else the patch shrinks and the new tears away from the old, and a worse hole is made. 2:22No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine pours out, and the skins will be destroyed; but they put new wine into fresh wineskins."

2:23It happened that he was going on the Sabbath day through the grain fields, and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of grain. 2:24The Pharisees said to him, "Behold, why do they do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day?"

2:25He said to them, "Did you never read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry -- he, and they who were with him? 2:26How he entered into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and ate the show bread, which it is not lawful to eat except for the priests, and gave also to those who were with him?" 2:27He said to them, "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. 2:28Therefore the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath."

3:1He entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man there who had his hand withered. 3:2They watched him, whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him. 3:3He said to the man who had his hand withered, "Stand up." 3:4He said to them, "Is it lawful on the Sabbath day to do good, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?" But they were silent. 3:5When he had looked around at them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their hearts, he said to the man, "Stretch out your hand." He stretched it out, and his hand was restored as healthy as the other. 3:6The Pharisees went out, and immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

3:7Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples, and a great multitude followed him from Galilee, from Judea, 3:8from Jerusalem, from Idumaea, beyond the Jordan, and those from around Tyre and Sidon. A great multitude, hearing what great things he did, came to him. 3:9He spoke to his disciples that a little boat should stay near him because of the crowd, so that they wouldn't press on him. 3:10For he had healed many, so that as many as had diseases pressed on him that they might touch him. 3:11The unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, "You are the Son of God!" 3:12He sternly warned them that they should not make him known.

3:13He went up into the mountain, and called to himself whom he wanted, and they went to him. 3:14He appointed twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send them out to preach, 3:15and to have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons: 3:16Simon, to whom he gave the name Peter; 3:17James the son of Zebedee; John, the brother of James, and them he surnamed Boanerges, which means, Sons of Thunder; 3:18Andrew; Philip; Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot; 3:19and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

He came into a house. 3:20The multitude came together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread. 3:21When his friends heard it, they went out to seize him: for they said, "He is insane." 3:22The scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, "He has Beelzebul," and, "By the prince of the demons he casts out the demons."

3:23He summoned them, and said to them in parables, "How can Satan cast out Satan? 3:24If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. 3:25If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand. 3:26If Satan has risen up against himself, and is divided, he can't stand, but has an end. 3:27But no one can enter into the house of the strong man to plunder, unless he first binds the strong man; and then he will plunder his house. 3:28Most assuredly I tell you, all their sins will be forgiven to the sons of men, and their blasphemies with which they may blaspheme; 3:29but whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin" 3:30-- because they said, "He has an unclean spirit."

3:31His mother and his brothers came, and standing outside, they sent to him, calling him. 3:32A multitude was sitting around him, and they told him, "Behold, your mother, your brothers, and your sisters are outside looking for you."

3:33He answered them, "Who are my mother and my brothers?" 3:34Looking around at those who sat around him, he said, "Behold, my mother and my brothers! 3:35For whoever may do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother."

4:1Again he began to teach by the seaside. A great multitude was gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat in the sea, and sat down. All the multitude were on the land by the sea. 4:2He taught them many things in parables, and told them in his teaching, 4:3"Listen! Behold, the farmer went forth to sow, 4:4and it happened, as he sowed, some seed fell by the road, and the birds came and devoured it. 4:5Others fell on the rocky ground, where it had little soil, and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil. 4:6When the sun had risen, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away. 4:7Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit. 4:8Others fell into the good ground, and yielded fruit, growing up and increasing. Some brought forth thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times as much."4:9He said, "Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear."

4:10When he was alone, those who were around him with the twelve asked him about the parables. 4:11He said to them, "To you is given the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside, all things are done in parables, 4:12that 'seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest perhaps they should turn again, and their sins should be forgiven them.'"

4:13He said to them, "Don't you understand this parable? How will you understand all of the parables? 4:14The farmer sows the word. 4:15These are the ones by the road, where the word is sown; and when they have heard, immediately Satan comes, and takes away the word which has been sown in them. 4:16These in like manner are those who are sown on the rocky places, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy. 4:17They have no root in themselves, but endure for a while, then, when oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately they stumble. 4:18Others are those who are sown among the thorns. These are those who have heard the word, 4:19and the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. 4:20These are those who were sown on the good ground: such as hear the word, and accept it, and bear fruit, some thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times."

4:21He said to them, "Is the lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed? Isn't it put on a lampstand? 4:22For there is nothing hidden, except that it should be made known; neither was anything made secret, but that it should come to light. 4:23If any man has ears to hear, let him hear."

4:24He said to them, "Take heed what you hear. With whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you, and more will be given to you who hear. 4:25For whoever has, to him will more be given, and he who doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he has."

4:26He said, "So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed on the earth, 4:27and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, he doesn't know how. 4:28For the earth bears fruit: first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear. 4:29But when the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts forth the sickle, because the harvest has come."

4:30He said, "How will we liken the kingdom of God? Or by what parable will we compare it? 4:31It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, though it is less than all the seeds that are on the earth, 4:32yet when it is sown, grows up, and becomes greater than all the herbs, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under its shadow."

4:33With many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it. 4:34Without a parable he didn't speak to them; but privately to his own disciples he explained all things.

4:35On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, "Let's go over to the other side." 4:36Leaving the multitude, they took him with them, even as he was, in the boat. Other small boats were also with him. 4:37There arose a great wind storm, and the waves beat into the boat, so much that the boat was already filled. 4:38He himself was in the stern, asleep on the cushion, and they woke him up, and told him, "Teacher, don't you care that we are dying?"

4:39He awoke, and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, "Peace! Be still!" The wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 4:40He said to them, "Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?"

4:41They were greatly afraid, and said to one another, "Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"

5:1They came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. 5:2When he had come out of the boat, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 5:3who had his dwelling in the tombs. Nobody could bind him any more, not even with chains, 5:4because he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been torn apart by him, and the fetters broken in pieces. Nobody had the strength to tame him. 5:5Always, night and day, in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones. 5:6When he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and bowed down to him, 5:7and crying out with a loud voice, he said, "What have I to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, don't torment me." 5:8For he said to him, "Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!"

5:9He asked him, "What is your name?"

He said to him, "My name is Legion, for we are many." 5:10He begged him much that he would not send them away out of the country. 5:11Now there was on the mountainside a great herd of pigs feeding. 5:12All the demons begged him, saying, "Send us into the pigs, that we may enter into them."

5:13At once Jesus gave them permission. The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs. The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea. 5:14Those who fed them fled, and told it in the city and in the country.

The people came to see what it was that had happened. 5:15They came to Jesus, and saw him who was possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind, even him who had the legion; and they were afraid. 5:16Those who saw it declared to them how it happened to him who was possessed by demons, and about the pigs. 5:17They began to beg him to depart from their borders.

5:18As he was entering into the boat, he who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him. 5:19He didn't allow him, but said to him, "Go to your house, to your friends, and tell them how the Lord has done great things for you, and how he had mercy on you."

5:20He went his way, and began to proclaim in Decapolis how Jesus had done great things for him, and everyone marveled.

5:21When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side, a great multitude was gathered to him; and he was by the sea. 5:22Behold, one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, came; and seeing him, he fell at his feet, 5:23and begged him much, saying, "My little daughter is at the point of death. Please come and lay your hands on her, that she may be made healthy, and live."

5:24He went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and they pressed upon him on all sides. 5:25A certain woman, who had an issue of blood for twelve years, 5:26and had suffered many things by many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was no better, but rather grew worse, 5:27having heard the things concerning Jesus, came up behind him in the crowd, and touched his clothes. 5:28For she said, "If I just touch his clothes, I will be made well." 5:29Immediately the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her plague.

5:30Immediately Jesus, perceiving in himself that the power had gone forth from him, turned around in the crowd, and asked, "Who touched my clothes?"

5:31His disciples said to him, "You see the multitude pressing against you, and you say, 'Who touched me?'"

5:32He looked around to see her who had done this thing. 5:33But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.

5:34He said to her, "Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be cured of your disease."

5:35While he was still speaking, they came from the synagogue ruler's house saying, "Your daughter is dead. Why bother the Teacher any more?"

5:36But Jesus, not heeding the word spoken, immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, "Don't be afraid, only believe." 5:37He allowed no one to follow him, except Peter, James, and John the brother of James. 5:38He came to the synagogue ruler's house, and he saw an uproar, weeping, and great wailing. 5:39When he had entered in, he said to them, "Why do you make an uproar and weep? The child is not dead, but is asleep."

5:40They laughed him to scorn. But he, having put them all out, took the father of the child and her mother and those who were with him, and went in where the child was lying. 5:41Taking the child by the hand, he said to her, "Talitha cumi;" which means, being interpreted, "Young lady, I tell you, get up." 5:42Immediately the young lady rose up, and walked, for she was twelve years old. They were amazed with great amazement. 5:43He charged them much that no one should know this, and commanded that something should be given to her to eat.

6:1He went out from there. He came into his own country, and his disciples followed him. 6:2When the Sabbath had come, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing him were astonished, saying, "Where did this man get these things?" and, "What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such mighty works come about by his hands? 6:3Isn't this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us?" They were offended by him.

6:4Jesus said to them, "A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house." 6:5He could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick folk, and healed them. 6:6He marveled because of their unbelief.

He went around the villages teaching. 6:7He called to himself the twelve, and began to send them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits. 6:8He charged them that they should take nothing for their journey, except a staff only: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse, 6:9but to wear sandals, and not put on two tunics. 6:10He said to them, "Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there. 6:11Whoever will not receive you nor hear you, as you depart from there, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them. Assuredly, I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city!"

6:12They went out and preached that people should repent. 6:13They cast out many demons, and anointed many with oil who were sick, and healed them. 6:14King Herod heard this, for his name had become known, and he said, "John the Baptizer has risen from the dead, and therefore these powers work in him." 6:15But others said, "It is Elijah." Others said, "It is the Prophet, or like one of the prophets." 6:16But Herod, when he heard this, said, "This is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen from the dead." 6:17For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, for he had married her. 6:18For John said to Herod, "It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife." 6:19Herodias set herself against him, and desired to kill him, but she couldn't, 6:20for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. When he heard him, he did many things, and he heard him gladly.

6:21When a convenient day had come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper for his lords, and the high captains, and the chief men of Galilee; 6:22and when the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those reclining with him. The king said to the young lady, "Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you." 6:23He swore to her, "Whatever you shall ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom."

6:24She went out, and said to her mother, "What shall I ask?"

She said, "The head of John the Baptizer."

6:25She came in immediately with haste to the king, and asked, "I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter."

6:26The king was exceedingly sorry, but for the sake of his oaths, and of his dinner guests, he didn't wish to refuse her. 6:27Immediately the king sent forth a soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring John's head, and he went and beheaded him in the prison, 6:28and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the young lady; and the young lady gave it to her mother.

6:29When his disciples heard this, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.

6:30The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus, and they told him all things, whatever they had done, and whatever they had taught. 6:31He said to them, "You come apart into a desert place, and rest awhile." For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 6:32They went away in the boat to a desert place by themselves. 6:33They saw them going, and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities. They arrived before them and came together to him. 6:34Jesus came out, saw a great multitude, and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things. 6:35When it was late in the day, his disciples came to him, and said, "This place is a desert, and it is late in the day. 6:36Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages, and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat."

6:37But he answered them, "You give them something to eat."

They asked him, "Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread, and give them something to eat?"

6:38He said to them, "How many loaves do you have? Go see."

When they knew, they said, "Five, and two fish."

6:39He commanded those that all should sit down by companies on the green grass. 6:40They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties. 6:41He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves, and he gave to his disciples to set before them, and he divided the two fish among them all. 6:42They all ate, and were filled. 6:43They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish. 6:44Those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.

6:45Immediately he made his disciples enter into the boat, and to go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the multitude away. 6:46After he had taken leave of them, he departed into the mountain to pray.

6:47When evening had come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he was alone on the land. 6:48Seeing them distressed in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them; and about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea, and he would have passed by them, 6:49but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out; 6:50for they all saw him, and were troubled. But he immediately spoke with them, and said to them, "Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid." 6:51He went up to them into the boat; and the wind ceased, and they were very amazed among themselves, and marveled; 6:52for they hadn't understood about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened.

6:53When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret, and moored to the shore. 6:54When they had come out of the boat, immediately the people recognized him, 6:55and ran around that whole region, and began to carry around those who were sick, on their mats, to where they heard he was. 6:56Wherever he entered, into villages, or into cities, or into the country, they laid the sick in the marketplaces, and begged him that they might touch just the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.

7:1Then the Pharisees, and some of the scribes gathered together to him, having come from Jerusalem. 7:2Now when they saw some of his disciples eating bread with defiled, that is, unwashed, hands, they found fault. 7:3(For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, don't eat unless they wash their hands and forearms, holding to the tradition of the elders. 7:4They don't eat when they come from the marketplace, unless they bathe themselves, and there are many other things, which they have received to hold to: washings of cups, pitchers, bronze vessels, and couches.) 7:5The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, "Why don't your disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?"

7:6He answered them, "Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written,

 'This people honors me with their lips,
      But their heart is far from me.

 7:7But in vain do they worship me,
      Teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.'

7:8"For you set aside the commandment of God, and hold tightly to the tradition of men -- the washing of pitchers and cups, and you do many other such things." 7:9He said to them, "Full well do you reject the commandment of God, that you may keep your tradition. 7:10For Moses said, 'Honor your father and your mother;' and, 'He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.' 7:11But you say, 'If a man will tell his father or his mother, "Whatever you might have been profited by me is Corban, that is to say, given to God;"' 7:12and you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother, 7:13making void the word of God by your tradition, which you have handed down. You do many things like this."

7:14He called all the multitude to himself, and said to them, "Hear me, all of you, and understand. 7:15There is nothing from outside of the man, that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out of the man are those that defile the man. 7:16If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!"

7:17When he had entered into the house from the multitude, his disciples asked him about the parable. 7:18He said to them, "Are you so without understanding also? Don't you perceive that whatever goes into the man from outside can't defile him, 7:19because it doesn't go into his heart, but into his belly, and into the latrine, thus making all foods clean?" 7:20He said, "That which proceeds out of the man, that defiles the man. 7:21For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, sexual sins, murders, thefts, 7:22covetings, wickedness, deceit, lustful desires, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, and foolishness. 7:23All these evil things proceed from within, and defile the man."

7:24From there he arose, and went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He entered into a house, and wanted no one to know it, but he couldn't escape detection. 7:25For a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his feet. 7:26Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. She begged him that he would cast the demon out of her daughter. 7:27But Jesus said to her, "Let the children be filled first, for it is not appropriate to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs."

7:28But she answered him, "Yes, Lord. For even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs."

7:29He said to her, "For this saying, go your way. The demon has gone out of your daughter."

7:30She went away to her house, and found the child laying on the bed, with the demon gone out.

7:31Again he departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the borders of Decapolis. 7:32They brought to him one who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech. They begged him to lay his hand on him. 7:33He took him aside from the multitude, privately, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spat, and touched his tongue. 7:34Looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to him, "Ephphatha!" that is, "Be opened!" 7:35Immediately his ears were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke clearly. 7:36He charged them that they should tell no one, but the more he charged them, so much the more widely they proclaimed it. 7:37They were astonished beyond measure, saying, "He has done all things well. He makes even the deaf hear, and the mute speak!"

8:1In those days, when there was a very great multitude, and they had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to himself, and said to them, 8:2"I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat. 8:3If I send them away fasting to their home, they will faint on the way, for some of them have come a long way."

8:4His disciples answered him, "From where will one be able to fill these men with bread here in a desert place?"

8:5He asked them, "How many loaves do you have?"

They said, "Seven."

8:6He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven loaves. Having given thanks, he broke them, and gave them to his disciples to serve, and they served the multitude. 8:7They had a few small fish. Having blessed them, he said to serve these also. 8:8They ate, and were filled. They took up seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over. 8:9Those who had eaten were about four thousand. Then he sent them away.

8:10Immediately he entered into the boat with his disciples, and came into the region of Dalmanutha. 8:11The Pharisees came out and began to question him, seeking a sign from heaven from him, and tempting him. 8:12He sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, "Why does this generation seek a sign? Most assuredly I tell you, there will no sign be given to this generation."

8:13He left them, and again entering into the boat, departed to the other side. 8:14They forgot to take bread; and they didn't have more than one loaf in the boat with them. 8:15He charged them, saying, "Take heed: beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod."

8:16They reasoned with one another, saying, "It's because we have no bread."

8:17Jesus, perceiving it, said to them, "Why do you reason that it's because you have no bread? Don't you perceive yet, neither understand? Is your heart still hardened? 8:18Having eyes, don't you see? Having ears, don't you hear? Don't you remember? 8:19When I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?"

They told him, "Twelve."

8:20"When the seven loaves fed the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?"

They told him, "Seven."

8:21He asked them, "Don't you understand, yet?"

8:22He came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to him, and begged him to touch him. 8:23He took hold of the blind man by the hand, and brought him out of the village. When he had spit on his eyes, and laid his hands on him, he asked him if he saw anything.

8:24He looked up, and said, "I see men; for I see them like trees walking."

8:25Then again he laid his hands on his eyes. He looked intently, and was restored, and saw everyone clearly. 8:26He sent him away to his house, saying, "Don't enter into the village, nor tell anyone in the village."

8:27Jesus went forth, with his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples, "Who do men say that I am?"

8:28They told him, "John the Baptizer, and others: Elijah, but others: one of the prophets."

8:29He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?"

Peter answered, "You are the Christ."

8:30He charged them that they should tell no one about him. 8:31He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 8:32He spoke to them openly. Peter took him, and began to rebuke him. 8:33But he, turning around, and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, and said, "Get behind me, Satan! For you have in mind not the things of God, but the things of men."

8:34He called the multitude to himself with his disciples, and said to them, "Whoever wants to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 8:35For whoever wants to save his life will lose it; and whoever will lose his life for my sake and the gospel's will save it. 8:36For what does it profit a man, to gain the whole world, and forfeit his life? 8:37For what should a man give in exchange for his life? 8:38For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels."

9:1He said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste death, until they see the kingdom of God come with power."

9:2After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up onto a high mountain privately by themselves, and he was changed into another form in front of them. 9:3His clothing became glistening, exceedingly white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth can whiten them. 9:4Elijah and Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.

9:5Peter answered Jesus, "Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let's make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah." 9:6For he didn't know what to say, for they were very afraid.

9:7A cloud came, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud, "This is my beloved Son. Listen to him."

9:8Suddenly looking around, they saw no one with them any more, except Jesus only.

9:9As they were coming down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no one what things they had seen, until the Son of Man had risen again from the dead. 9:10They kept the saying, questioning among themselves what the rising again from the dead should mean.

9:11They asked him, saying, "Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?"

9:12He said to them, "Elijah indeed comes first, and restores all things. How is it written about the Son of Man, that he should suffer many things and be despised? 9:13But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to, even as it is written about him."

9:14Coming to the disciples, he saw a great multitude around them, and scribes questioning them. 9:15Immediately all the multitude, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him greeted him. 9:16He asked the scribes, "What are you asking them?"

9:17One of the multitude answered, "Teacher, I brought to you my son, who has a mute spirit; 9:18and wherever it seizes him, it dashes him down, and he foams at the mouth, and grinds his teeth, and wastes away. I asked your disciples to cast it out, and they weren't able."

9:19He answered him, "Unbelieving generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him to me."

9:20They brought him to him, and when he saw him, immediately the spirit convulsed him, and he fell on the ground, wallowing and foaming at the mouth.

9:21He asked his father, "How long has it been since this has come to him?"

He said, "From childhood. 9:22Often it has cast him both into the fire and into the water, to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have compassion on us, and help us."

9:23Jesus said to him, "If you can believe, all things are possible to him who believes."

9:24Immediately the father of the child cried out with tears, "I believe. Help my unbelief!"

9:25When Jesus saw that a multitude came running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him, "You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and enter no more into him!"

9:26Having cried out, and convulsed greatly, it came out of him. The boy became like one dead; so much that most of them said, "He is dead." 9:27But Jesus took him by the hand, and raised him up; and he arose.

9:28When he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, "Why couldn't we cast it out?" 9:29He said to them, "This kind can come out by nothing, except by prayer and fasting."

9:30They went forth from there, and passed through Galilee. He didn't want anyone to know it. 9:31For he taught his disciples, and said to them, "The Son of Man is delivered up into the hands of men, and they will kill him; and when he is killed, on the third day he will rise again."

9:32But they didn't understand the saying, and were afraid to ask him.

9:33He came to Capernaum, and when he was in the house he asked them, "What were you arguing among yourselves on the way?"

9:34But they were silent, for they had disputed one with another on the way about who was the greatest.

9:35He sat down, and called the twelve; and he said to them, "If any man wants to be first, he shall be last of all, and servant of all." 9:36He took a little child, and set him in the midst of them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them, 9:37"Whoever receives one such little child in my name, receives me, and whoever receives me, doesn't receive me, but him who sent me."

9:38John said to him, "Teacher, we saw someone who doesn't follow us casting out demons in your name; and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow us."

9:39But Jesus said, "Don't forbid him, for there is no one who will do a mighty work in my name, and be able quickly to speak evil of me. 9:40For whoever is not against us is on our side. 9:41For whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because you are Christ's, most assuredly I tell you, he will in no way lose his reward. 9:42Whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea. 9:43If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than having your two hands to go into Gehenna, into the unquenchable fire, 9:44'where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.' 9:45If your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame, rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna, into the fire that will never be quenched -- 9:46'where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.' 9:47If your eye causes you to stumble, cast it out. It is better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire, 9:48'where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.' 9:49For everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt. 9:50Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another."

10:1He arose from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan. Multitudes came together to him again. As he usually did, he taught them again. 10:2Pharisees came to him testing him, and asked him, "Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?"

10:3He answered, "What did Moses command you?"

10:4They said, "Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written, and to divorce her."

10:5But Jesus said to them, "For your hardness of heart, he wrote you this commandment. 10:6But from the beginning of the creation, 'God made them male and female. 10:7For this cause will a man leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife, 10:8and the two will become one flesh,' so that they are no longer two, but one flesh. 10:9What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate."

10:10In the house, his disciples asked him again about the same matter. 10:11He said to them, "Whoever divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery against her. 10:12If a woman herself divorces her husband, and marries another, she commits adultery."

10:13They were bringing to him little children, that he should touch them, but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them. 10:14But when Jesus saw it, he was moved with indignation, and said to them, "Allow the little children to come to me! Don't forbid them, for to such belong the kingdom of God. 10:15Most assuredly I tell you, whoever will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter therein." 10:16He took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands on them.

10:17As he was going forth into the way, one ran to him, kneeled to him, and asked him, "Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?"

10:18Jesus said to him, "Why do you call me good? No one is good except one -- God. 10:19You know the commandments: 'Do not murder,' 'Do not commit adultery,' 'Do not steal,' 'Do not give false testimony,' 'Do not defraud,' 'Honor your father and mother.'"

10:20He said to him, "Teacher, I have observed all these things from my youth."

10:21Jesus looking at him loved him, and said to him, "One thing you lack. Go, sell whatever you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, taking up the cross."

10:22But his face fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful, for he was one who had great possessions. 10:23Jesus looked around, and said to his disciples, "How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into the kingdom of God!"

10:24The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again, "Children, how hard is it for those who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! 10:25It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

10:26They were exceedingly astonished, saying to him, "Then who can be saved?"

10:27Jesus, looking at them, said, "With men it is impossible, but not with God, for all things are possible with God."

10:28Peter began to tell him, "Behold, we have left all, and have followed you."

10:29Jesus said, "Most assuredly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and for the gospel's sake, 10:30but he will receive one hundred times now in this time, houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and land, with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life. 10:31But many who are first will be last; and the last first."

10:32They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going in front of them, and they were amazed; and those who followed were afraid. He again took the twelve, and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him. 10:33"Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles. 10:34They will mock him, spit on him, scourge him, and kill him. On the third day he will rise again."

10:35James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came near to him, saying, "Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we will ask."

10:36He said to them, "What do you want me to do for you?"

10:37They said to him, "Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right hand, and one at your left hand, in your glory."

10:38But Jesus said to them, "You don't know what you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?"

10:39They said to him, "We are able."

Jesus said to them, "You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink, and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; 10:40but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared."

10:41When the ten heard it, they began to be moved with indignation towards James and John.

10:42Jesus summoned them, and said to them, "You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. 10:43But it shall not be so among you, but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant. 10:44Whoever of you wants to become first among you, shall be servant of all. 10:45For the Son of Man also came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."

10:46They came to Jericho. As he went out from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the road. 10:47When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out, and say, "Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!" 10:48Many rebuked him, that he should be quiet, but he cried out the more a great deal, "You son of David, have mercy on me!"

10:49Jesus stood still, and said, "Call him."

They called the blind man, saying to him, "Cheer up! Get up. He is calling you!"

10:50He, casting away his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.

10:51Jesus answered him, "What do you want me to do for you?"

The blind man said to him, "Rhabboni, that I may see again."

10:52Jesus said to him, "Go your way. Your faith has made you well." Immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.

11:1When they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, 11:2and said to them, "Go your way into the village that is opposite you. Immediately as you enter into it, you will find a colt tied, on which no one has sat. Untie him, and bring him. 11:3If anyone asks you, 'Why are you doing this?' say, 'The Lord needs him;' and immediately he will send him back here."

11:4They went away, and found a colt tied at the door outside in the open street, and they untied him. 11:5Some of those who stood there asked them, "What are you doing, untying the colt?" 11:6They said to them just as Jesus had said, and they let them go.

11:7They brought the colt to Jesus, and threw their garments on him, and Jesus sat on him. 11:8Many spread their garments on the way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees, and spreading them on the road. 11:9Those who went in front, and those who followed, cried, "Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! 11:10Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"

11:11Jesus entered into the temple in Jerusalem. When he had looked around at everything, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.

11:12The next day, when they had come out from Bethany, he was hungry. 11:13Seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came to see if perhaps he might find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs. 11:14Jesus told it, "May no one ever eat fruit from you again!" and his disciples heard it.

11:15They came to Jerusalem, and Jesus entered into the temple, and began to throw out those who sold and those who bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of those who sold the doves. 11:16He would not allow anyone to carry a container through the temple. 11:17He taught, saying to them, "Isn't it written, 'My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations?' But you have made it a den of robbers!"

11:18The chief priests and the scribes heard it, and sought how they might destroy him. For they feared him, for all the multitude was astonished at his teaching.

11:19When evening came, he went forth out of the city. 11:20As they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots. 11:21Peter, remembering, said to him, "Rabbi, look! The fig tree which you cursed has withered away."

11:22Jesus answering said to them, "Have faith in God. 11:23For most assuredly I tell you, whoever may tell this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' and doesn't doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says happens; he shall have whatever he says. 11:24Therefore I tell you, all things whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you receive them, and you shall have them. 11:25Whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against anyone; so that your Father, who is in heaven, may also forgive you your transgressions. 11:26But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your transgressions."

11:27They came again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders came to him, 11:28and they began saying to him, "By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?"

11:29Jesus said to them, "I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. 11:30The baptism of John -- was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me."

11:31They reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we should say, 'From heaven;' he will say, 'Why then did you not believe him?' 11:32If we should say, 'From men'"--they feared the people, for all held John to really be a prophet. 11:33They answered Jesus, "We don't know."

Jesus said to them, "Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things."

12:1He began to speak to them in parables. "A man planted a vineyard, set a hedge around it, dug a pit for the winepress, built a tower, rented it out to a farmer, and went into another country. 12:2When it was time, he sent a servant to the farmer to get from the farmer his share of the fruit of the vineyard. 12:3They took him, beat him, and sent him away empty. 12:4Again, he sent another servant to them; and they threw stones at him, wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully treated. 12:5Again he sent another; and they killed him; and many others, beating some, and killing some. 12:6Therefore he had yet one, a beloved son, he sent him last to them, saying, 'They will respect my son.' 12:7But those farmers said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.' 12:8They took him, killed him, and cast him forth out of the vineyard. 12:9What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others. 12:10Haven't you even read this Scripture:

 'The stone which the builders rejected,
      The same was made the head of the corner.

 12:11This was from the Lord,
      It is marvelous in our eyes'?"

12:12They tried to seize him, but they feared the multitude; for they perceived that he spoke the parable against them. They left him, and went away. 12:13They sent some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to him, that they might catch him in words. 12:14When they had come, they asked him, "Teacher, we know that you are honest, and don't defer to anyone; for you aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not? 12:15Shall we give, or shall we not give?"

But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, "Why do you test me? Bring me a denarius, that I may see it."

12:16They brought it.

He said to them, "Whose is this image and inscription?"

They said to him, "Caesar's."

12:17Jesus answered them, "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

They marveled greatly at him.

12:18There came to him Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection. They asked him, saying, 12:19"Teacher, Moses wrote to us, 'If a man's brother dies, and leaves a wife behind him, and leaves no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up offspring for his brother.' 12:20There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and dying left no offspring. 12:21The second took her, and died, leaving no children behind him. The third likewise; 12:22and the seven took her and left no children. Last of all the woman also died. 12:23In the resurrection, when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as a wife."

12:24Jesus answered them, "Isn't this because you are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God? 12:25For when they will rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. 12:26But about the dead, that they are raised; haven't you read in the book of Moses, at the Bush, how God spoke to him, saying, 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?' 12:27He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are therefore badly mistaken."

12:28One of the scribes came, and heard them questioning together. Knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, "What commandment is the greatest of all?"

12:29Jesus answered, "The greatest is, 'Hear, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one: 12:30you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.' This is the primary commandment. 12:31The second is like this, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' There is no other commandment greater than these."

12:32The scribe said to him, "Truly, teacher, you have said well that he is one, and there is none other but he, 12:33and to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices."

12:34When Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said to him, "You are not far from the kingdom of God."

No one dared ask him any question after that. 12:35Jesus responded, as he taught in the temple, "How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David? 12:36For David himself said in the Holy Spirit,

 'The Lord said to my Lord,
      Sit at my right hand,
      Until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.'

12:37Therefore David himself calls him Lord, so how can he be his son?"

The common people heard him gladly. 12:38In his teaching he said to them, "Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes, and to get greetings in the marketplaces, 12:39and chief seats in the synagogues, and chief places at feasts: 12:40those who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers. These will receive greater condemnation."

12:41Jesus sat down opposite the treasury, and saw how the multitude cast money into the treasury. Many who were rich cast in much. 12:42A poor widow came, and she cast in two lepta, which make a quadrans. 12:43He called his disciples to himself, and said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, this poor widow gave more than all those who are giving into the treasury, 12:44for they all gave out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, gave all that she had to live on."

13:1As he went forth out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him, "Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings!"

13:2Jesus said to him, "Do you see these great buildings? There will not be left here one stone on another, which will not be thrown down."

13:3As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 13:4"Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign that these things are all about to be accomplished?"

13:5Jesus, answering, began to tell them, "Be careful that no one leads you astray. 13:6For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he!' and will lead many astray.

13:7"When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, don't be troubled. For those must happen, but the end is not yet. 13:8For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places. There will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginning of birth pains. 13:9But watch yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils. You will be beaten in synagogues. Before governors and kings you will stand for my sake, for a testimony to them. 13:10The gospel must first be preached to all the nations. 13:11When they lead you away and deliver you up, don't be anxious beforehand, or premeditate what you will say, but say whatever will be given you in that hour. For it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.

13:12"Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death. 13:13You will be hated by all men for my name's sake, but he who endures to the end, the same will be saved. 13:14But when you see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, 13:15and let him who is on the housetop not go down, nor enter in, to take anything out of his house. 13:16Let him who is in the field not return back to take his cloak. 13:17But woe to those who are with child and to those who nurse babies in those days! 13:18Pray that your flight won't be in the winter. 13:19For in those days there will be oppression, such as there has not been the like from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, and never will be. 13:20Unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the elect's sake, whom he chose, he shortened the days. 13:21Then if anyone tells you, 'Look, here is the Christ!' or, 'Look, there!' don't believe it. 13:22For there will arise false christs and false prophets, and will show signs and wonders, that they may lead astray, if possible, also the elect. 13:23But you watch.

"Behold, I have told you all things beforehand. 13:24But in those days, after that oppression, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give her light, 13:25the stars will be falling from the sky, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken. 13:26Then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory. 13:27Then he will send forth his angels, and will gather together his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the sky.

13:28"Now from the fig tree, learn this parable. When the branch has now become tender, and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near; 13:29even so you also, when you see these things coming to pass, know that it is near, at the doors. 13:30Most assuredly I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things are accomplished. 13:31Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. 13:32But of that day or that hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but only the Father. 13:33Watch, keep alert, and pray; for you don't know when the time is.

13:34"It is like a man, traveling to another country, having left his house, and given authority to his servants, and to each one his work, and also commanded the doorkeeper to keep watch. 13:35Watch therefore, for you don't know when the lord of the house is coming, whether at evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or in the morning; 13:36lest coming suddenly he might find you sleeping. 13:37What I tell you, I tell all: Watch."

14:1It was now two days before the feast of the Passover and the unleavened bread, and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might sieze him by deception, and kill him. 14:2For they said, "Not during the feast, because there might be a riot of the people."

14:3While he was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at the table, a woman came having an alabaster jar of ointment of pure nard -- very costly. She broke the jar, and poured it over his head. 14:4But there were some who had indignation among themselves, saying, "Why has this ointment been wasted? 14:5For this might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii, and given to the poor." They grumbled against her.

14:6But Jesus said, "Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for me. 14:7For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want to, you can do them good; but you will not always have me. 14:8She has done what she could. She has anointed my body beforehand for the burying. 14:9Most assuredly I tell you, wherever this gospel may be preached throughout the whole world, that also which this woman has done will be spoken of for a memorial of her."

14:10Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, that he might deliver him to them. 14:11They, when they heard it, were glad, and promised to give him money. He sought how he might conveniently deliver him. 14:12On the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, his disciples asked him, "Where do you want us to go and make ready that you may eat the Passover?"

14:13He sent two of his disciples, and said to them, "Go into the city, and there you will meet a man carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him, 14:14and wherever he enters in, tell the master of the house, 'The Teacher says, "Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?"' 14:15He will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready. Make ready for us there."

14:16His disciples went out, and came into the city, and found things as he had said to them, and they prepared the Passover.

14:17When it was evening he came with the twelve. 14:18As they sat and were eating, Jesus said, "Most assuredly I tell you, one of you will betray me -- he who eats with me."

14:19They began to be sorrowful, and to ask him one by one, "Surely not I?" And another said, "Surely not I?"

14:20He answered them, "It is one of the twelve, he who dips with me in the dish. 14:21For the Son of Man goes, even as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born."

14:22As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he broke it, and gave to them, and said, "Take, eat. This is my body."

14:23He took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to them. They all drank of it. 14:24He said to them, "This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many. 14:25Most assuredly I tell you, I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God." 14:26When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.

14:27Jesus said to them, "All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.' 14:28However, after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee."

14:29But Peter said to him, "Although all will be offended, yet I will not."

14:30Jesus said to him, "Most assuredly I tell you, that you today, even this night, before the cock crows twice, you will deny me three times."

14:31But he spoke all the more, "If I must die with you, I will not deny you." Likewise, they all said so.

14:32They came to a place which was named Gethsemane. He said to his disciples, "Sit here, while I pray." 14:33He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be greatly alarmed and distressed. 14:34He said to them, "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch."

14:35He went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him. 14:36He said, "Abba, Father, all things are possible to you. Please remove this cup from me. However, not what I desire, but what you desire."

14:37He came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, "Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn't you watch one hour? 14:38Watch and pray, that you not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."

14:39Again he went away, and prayed, saying the same words. 14:40Again he returned, and found them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy, and they didn't know what to answer him. 14:41He came the third time, and said to them, "Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. 14:42Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand."

14:43Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, came -- and with him a multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders. 14:44Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, "Whoever I will kiss, that is he. Seize him, and lead him away safely." 14:45When he had come, immediately he came to him, and said, "Rabbi! Rabbi!" and kissed him. 14:46They laid their hands on him, and seized him. 14:47But a certain one of those who stood by drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.

14:48Jesus answered them, "Have you come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me? 14:49I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me. But this is so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled."

14:50They all left him, and fled. 14:51A certain young man followed with him, having a linen cloth thrown around him, over his naked body. The young men grabbed him, 14:52but he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked. 14:53They led Jesus away to the high priest. All the chief priests, the elders, and the scribes came together with him.

14:54Peter had followed him afar off, until he came into the court of the high priest. He was sitting with the officers, and warming himself in the light of the fire. 14:55Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witnesses against Jesus to put him to death, and found none. 14:56For many gave false testimony against him, and their testimony didn't agree with each other. 14:57Some stood up, and gave false testimony against him, saying, 14:58"We heard him say, 'I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands.'" 14:59Even so, their testimony did not agree.

14:60The high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, "Have you no answer? What is it which these testify against you?" 14:61But he stayed quiet, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, "Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?"

14:62Jesus said, "I AM. You will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of the sky."

14:63The high priest tore his clothes, and said, "What further need have we of witnesses? 14:64You have heard the blasphemy! What do you think?" They all condemned him to be worthy of death. 14:65Some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to beat him with fists, and to tell him, "Prophesy!" The officers struck him with the palms of their hands.

14:66As Peter was beneath in the court, one of the maids of the high priest came, 14:67and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked at him, and said, "You were also with the Nazarene, Jesus!"

14:68But he denied it, saying, "I neither know, nor understand what you are saying." He went out into the porch, and the cock crowed.

14:69The maid saw him, and began again to tell those who stood by, "This is one of them." 14:70But he again denied it. After a little while again those who stood by said to Peter, "You truly are one of them, for you are a Galilean, and your speech shows it." 14:71But he began to curse, and to swear, "I don't know this man of whom you speak!" 14:72The cock crowed the second time. Peter remembered the word, how that Jesus said to him, "Before the cock crows twice, you will deny me three times." When he thought about that, he wept.

15:1Immediately in the morning the chief priests, with the elders and scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate. 15:2Pilate asked him, "Are you the King of the Jews?"

He answered, "So you say."

15:3The chief priests accused him of many things. 15:4Pilate again asked him, "Have you no answer? See how many things they testify against you!"

15:5But Jesus made no further answer, so Pilate marveled.

15:6Now at the feast he used to release to them one prisoner, whom they asked of him. 15:7There was one called Barabbas, bound with those who had made insurrection, men who in the insurrection had committed murder. 15:8The multitude, crying aloud, began to ask him to do as he always did for them. 15:9Pilate answered them, saying, "Do you you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?" 15:10For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up. 15:11But the chief priests stirred up the multitude, that he should release Barabbas to them instead. 15:12Pilate again asked them, "What then should I do to him whom you call the King of the Jews?"

15:13They cried out again, "Crucify him!"

15:14Pilate said to them, "Why, what evil has he done?"

But they cried out exceedingly, "Crucify him!"

15:15Pilate, wishing to please the multitude, released Barabbas to them, and delivered Jesus, when he had flogged him, to be crucified. 15:16The soldiers led him away within the court, which is the Praetorium; and they called together the whole cohort. 15:17They clothed him with purple, and weaving a crown of thorns, they put it on him. 15:18They began to salute him, "Hail, King of the Jews!" 15:19They struck his head with a reed, and spat on him, and bowing their knees, did homage to him. 15:20When they had mocked him, they took the purple off of him, and put his own garments on him. They led him out to crucify him. 15:21They compelled one passing by, coming from the country, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them, that he might bear his cross. 15:22They brought him to the place called Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, "The place of a skull." 15:23They offered him wine mixed with myrrh to drink, but he didn't take it.

15:24Crucifying him, they parted his garments among them, casting lots on them, what each should take. 15:25It was the third hour, and they crucified him. 15:26The superscription of his accusation was written over him, "THE KING OF THE JEWS." 15:27With him they crucified two robbers; one on his right hand, and one on his left. 15:28The Scripture was fulfilled, which says, "He was numbered with transgressors."

15:29Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and saying, "Ha! You who destroy the temple, and build it in three days, 15:30save yourself, and come down from the cross!"

15:31Likewise, also the chief priests mocking among themselves with the scribes said, "He saved others. He can't save himself. 15:32Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe him." Those who were crucified with him reproached him.

15:33When the sixth hour had come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. 15:34At the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?" which is, being interpreted, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"

15:35Some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, "Behold, he calls Elijah."

15:36One ran, and filling a sponge full of vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, "Let him be. Let's see whether Elijah comes to take him down."

15:37Jesus cried out with a loud voice, and gave up the spirit. 15:38The veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. 15:39When the centurion, who stood by opposite him, saw that he cried out like this and breathed his last, he said, "Truly this man was the Son of God!"

15:40There were also women watching from afar, among whom were both Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome; 15:41who, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and served him; and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.

15:42When evening had now come, because it was the Preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath, 15:43Joseph of Arimathaea, a member of the council of honorable estate, who also himself was looking for the kingdom of God, came. He boldly went in to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body. 15:44Pilate marveled if he were already dead; and summoning the centurion, he asked him whether he had been dead for a while. 15:45When he learned it from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph. 15:46He bought a linen cloth, and taking him down, wound him in the linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of a rock. He rolled a stone against the door of the tomb. 15:47Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, saw where he was laid.

16:1When the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might come and anoint him. 16:2Very early on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb when the sun had risen. 16:3They were saying among themselves, "Who will roll away the stone from the door of the tomb for us?" 16:4for it was very big. Looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back.

16:5Entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, dressed in a white robe, and they were amazed. 16:6He said to them, "Don't be amazed. You seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified. He has risen. He is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him! 16:7But go, tell his disciples and Peter, 'He goes before you into Galilee. There you will see him, as he said to you.'"

16:8They went out, and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had come on them. They said nothing to anyone; for they were afraid. 16:9Now when he had risen early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons. 16:10She went and told those who had been with him, as they mourned and wept. 16:11When they heard that he was alive, and had been seen by her, they disbelieved. 16:12After these things he was revealed in another form to two of them, as they walked, on their way into the country. 16:13They went away and told it to the rest. They didn't believe them, either.

16:14Afterward he was revealed to the eleven themselves as they sat at the table, and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they didn't believe those who had seen him after he had risen. 16:15He said to them, "Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to the whole creation. 16:16He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who disbelieves will be condemned. 16:17These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new languages; 16:18they will take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it will in no way hurt them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover."

16:19So then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was received up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God. 16:20They went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs that followed. Amen.

Notes:

[1] back to 1:4 To baptize means to immerse in (or apply) water (or fire), not just to cleanse the body, but as an outward sign of an inward spiritual cleansing and commitment.

[2] back to 4:21 Literally, a modion, a dry measure containing about a peck (about 9 litres)

[3] back to 6:37 200 denarii was about 7 or 8 months wages for an agricultural laborer.

[4] back to 6:50 Literally, "I AM"

[5] back to 7:11 Corban is a Hebrew word for an offering devoted to God.

[6] back to 8:12 The word translated "generation" here (genea) could also be translated "people," "race," or "family."

[7] back to 9:43 Gehenna is a word for Hell that originated as the name for a place where live babies were thrown crying into the fire under the arms of the idol, Moloch, to die. This place was so despised by the people after the righteous King Josiah abolished this hideous practice, that not only was it made into a garbage heap, but dead bodies of diseased animals and executed criminals were thrown there and burned.

[8] back to 10:51 Rhabboni is a transliteration of the Hebrew word for "great teacher."

[9] back to 12:42 Lepta are very small brass coins worth half a quadrans each, which is a quarter of the copper assarion. Lepta are worth less than 1% of an agricultural worker's daily wages.

[10] back to 12:42 A quadrans is a coin worth about 1/64 of a denarius. A denarius is about one day's wages for an agricultural laborer.

[11] back to 13:6 Literally, I AM!

[12] back to 13:30 The word translated "generation" (genea) could also be translated "race," "family," or "people."

[13] back to 14:5 300 denarii was about a years wages for an agricultural laborer.

[14] back to 15:33 noon

[15] back to 15:33 3:00 PM




The Gospel According to Luke

1:1Because many have undertaken to draw up a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us, 1:2even as they delivered them to us, who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word, 1:3it seemed good to me also, having traced the course of all things accurately from the first, to write to you in order, most excellent Theophilus; 1:4that you might know the certainty concerning the things in which you were instructed.

1:5There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the priestly division of Abijah. He had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 1:6They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. 1:7But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well advanced in years. 1:8Now it happened, while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his division, 1:9according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn incense. 1:10The whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.

1:11An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense. 1:12Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell on him. 1:13But the angel said to him, "Don't be afraid, Zacharias, because your request has been heard, and your wife, Elizabeth, will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John. 1:14You will have joy and gladness; and many will rejoice at his birth. 1:15For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he will drink no wine nor strong drink. He will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb. 1:16He will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God. 1:17He will go before his face in the spirit and power of Elijah, 'to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,' and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord."

1:18Zacharias said to the angel, "How can I be sure of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years."

1:19The angel answered him, "I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God. I was sent to speak to you, and to bring you this good news. 1:20Behold, you will be silent and not able to speak, until the day that these things will happen, because you didn't believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time."

1:21The people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marveled while he delayed in the temple. 1:22When he came out, he could not speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. He continued making signs to them, and remained mute. 1:23It happened, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house. 1:24After these days Elizabeth, his wife, conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying, 1:25"Thus has the Lord done to me in the days in which he looked at me, to take away my reproach among men."

1:26Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, 1:27to a virgin pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. The virgin's name was Mary. 1:28Having come in to her, the angel said, "Rejoice, you highly favored one! The Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women!"

1:29But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered what kind of salutation this might be. 1:30The angel said to her, "Don't be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. 1:31Behold, you will conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son, and will call his name 'Jesus.' 1:32He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give to him the throne of his father, David, 1:33and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever. There will be no end of his kingdom."

1:34Mary said to the angel, "How will this be, seeing I am a virgin?"

1:35The angel answered her, "The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore also the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God. 1:36Behold, Elizabeth, your relative, also has conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. 1:37For no word from God will be void of power."

1:38Mary said, "Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to your word."

The angel departed from her. 1:39Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah, 1:40and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth. 1:41It happened, when Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit. 1:42She called out with a loud voice, and said, "Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb! 1:43Why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 1:44For behold, when the voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby leaped in my womb for joy! 1:45Blessed is she who believed, for there will be a fulfillment of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord!"

1:46Mary said,

 "My soul magnifies the Lord.
      1:47My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
      1:48For he has looked at the humble state of his handmaid.

 For behold, from now on, all generations will call me blessed.
      1:49For he who is mighty has done to me great things.
      Holy is his name.
      1:50His mercy is for generations of generations on those who fear him.

 1:51He has shown strength with his arm.
      He has scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.

 1:52He has put down princes from their thrones.
      And has exalted the lowly.

 1:53He has filled the hungry with good things.
      He has sent the rich away empty.

 1:54He has given help to Israel, his servant, that he might remember mercy,
      1:55As he spoke to our fathers,
      Toward Abraham and his seed forever."

1:56Mary stayed with her about three months, and returned to her house. 1:57Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was fulfilled, and she brought forth a son. 1:58Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her. 1:59It happened on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after the name of the father. 1:60His mother answered, "Not so; but he will be called John."

1:61They said to her, "There is no one among your relatives who is called by this name." 1:62They made signs to his father, what he would have him called.

1:63He asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, "His name is John."

They all marveled. 1:64His mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue freed, and he spoke, blessing God. 1:65Fear came on all who lived around them, and all these sayings were talked about throughout all the hill country of Judea. 1:66All who heard them laid them up in their heart, saying, "What then will this child be?" The hand of the Lord was with him. 1:67His father, Zacharias, was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,

 1:68"Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
      For he has visited and worked redemption for his people;

 1:69And has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
      1:70(As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been from of old),
      1:71Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us;

 1:72To show mercy towards our fathers,
      To remember his holy covenant,

 1:73The oath which he spoke to Abraham, our father,
      1:74To grant to us that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, should serve him without fear,
      1:75In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

 1:76And you, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High,
      For you will go before the face of the Lord to make ready his ways,
      1:77To give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins,

 1:78Because of the tender mercy of our God,
      Whereby the dawn from on high will visit us,
      1:79To shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death;
      To guide our feet into the way of peace."

1:80The child grew, and grew strong in spirit, and was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.

2:1Now it happened in those days, that a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled. 2:2This was the first enrollment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria. 2:3All went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city. 2:4Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David; 2:5to enroll himself with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him as wife, being great with child.

2:6It happened, while they were there, that the day had come that she should give birth. 2:7She brought forth her firstborn son, and she wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a feeding trough, because there was no room for them in the inn. 2:8There were shepherds in the same country staying in the field, and keeping watch by night over their flock. 2:9Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified. 2:10The angel said to them, "Don't be afraid, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy which will be to all the people. 2:11For there is born to you, this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord. 2:12This is the sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth, lying in a feeding trough." 2:13Suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

 2:14"Glory to God in the highest,
      On earth peace, good will toward men."

2:15It happened, when the angels went away from them into the sky, that the shepherds said one to another, "Let's go to Bethlehem, now, and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us." 2:16They came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby lying in the feeding trough. 2:17When they saw it, they publicized widely the saying which was spoken to them about this child. 2:18All who heard it wondered at the things which were spoken to them by the shepherds. 2:19But Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart. 2:20The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, even as it was spoken to them.

2:21When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of the child, his name was called Jesus, which was given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.

2:22When the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord 2:23(as it is written in the law of the Lord, "Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord"), 2:24and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, "A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons."

2:25Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon; and this man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him. 2:26It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. 2:27He came in the Spirit into the temple. When the parents brought in the child, Jesus, that they might do concerning him according to the custom of the law, 2:28then he received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said,

 2:29"Now let you your servant depart, Lord,
      According to your word, in peace;

 2:30For my eyes have seen your salvation,
      2:31Which you have prepared before the face of all peoples;

 2:32A light for revelation to the Gentiles,
      The glory of your people Israel."

2:33Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things which were spoken concerning him, 2:34and Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary, his mother, "Behold, this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against. 2:35Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul, that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed."

2:36There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity, 2:37and she had been a widow for about eighty-four years), who didn't depart from the temple, worshipping with fastings and petitions night and day. 2:38Coming up at that very hour, she gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.

2:39When they had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city, Nazareth. 2:40The child grew, and grew strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was on him. 2:41His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover.

2:42When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast, 2:43and when they had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. Joseph and his mother didn't know it, 2:44but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's journey, and they looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances. 2:45When they didn't find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him. 2:46It happened after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them, and asking them questions. 2:47All who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers. 2:48When they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, "Son, why have you treated us this way? Behold, your father and I were anxiously looking for you."

2:49He said to them, "Why were you looking for me? Didn't you know that I must be in my Father's house?" 2:50They didn't understand the saying which he spoke to them. 2:51He went down with them, and came to Nazareth. He was subject to them, and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart. 2:52Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.

3:1Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, 3:2in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. 3:3He came into all the region around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance to remission of sins. 3:4As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet,

 "The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
      'Make ready the way of the Lord.

 Make his paths straight.
      3:5Every valley will be filled.

 Every mountain and hill will be brought low.
      The crooked will become straight,
      And the rough ways smooth.

 3:6All flesh will see God's salvation.'"

3:7He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be baptized by him, "You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 3:8Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and don't begin to say among yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father;' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones! 3:9Even now the ax also lies at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire."

3:10The multitudes asked him, "What then must we do?"

3:11He answered them, "He who has two coats, let him give to him who has none. He who has food, let him do likewise."

3:12Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, "Teacher, what must we do?"

3:13He said to them, "Collect no more than that which is appointed to you."

3:14Soldiers also asked him, saying, "What about us? What must we do?"

He said to them, "Extort from no one by violence, neither accuse anyone wrongfully. Be content with your wages."

3:15As the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ, 3:16John answered them all, "I indeed baptize you with water, but he comes who is mightier than I, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to loosen. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire, 3:17whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor, and will gather the wheat into his barn; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire."

3:18Then with many other exhortations he preached good news to the people, 3:19but Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias, his brother's wife, and for all the evil things which Herod had done, 3:20added this also to them all, that he shut up John in prison. 3:21Now it happened, when all the people were baptized, that, Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the sky was opened, 3:22and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form, as a dove on him; and a voice came out of the sky, saying "You are my beloved Son. In you I am well pleased."

3:23Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli, 3:24the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph, 3:25the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai, 3:26the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah, 3:27the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri, 3:28the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er, 3:29the son of Josa, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, 3:30the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim, 3:31the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, 3:32the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon, 3:33the son of Amminadab, the son of Aram, the son of Joram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 3:34the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, 3:35the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah 3:36the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 3:37the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, 3:38the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.

4:1Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness 4:2for forty days, being tempted by the devil. He ate nothing in those days. Afterward, when they were completed, he was hungry. 4:3The devil said to him, "If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread."

4:4Jesus answered him, saying, "It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.'"

4:5The devil, leading him up on a high mountain, showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 4:6The devil said to him, "I will give you all this authority, and their glory, for it has been delivered to me; and I give it to whomever I want. 4:7If you therefore will worship before me, it will all be yours."

4:8Jesus answered him, "Get behind me Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.'"

4:9He led him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, "If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down from here, 4:10for it is written,

 'He will give his angels charge concerning you, to guard you;'

4:11and,

 'On their hands they will bear you up,
      Lest perhaps you dash your foot against a stone.'"

4:12Jesus answering, said to him, "It has been said, 'You shall not tempt the Lord your God.'"

4:13When the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from him until another time.

4:14Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and news about him spread through all the surrounding area. 4:15He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.

4:16He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up. He entered, as was his custom, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read. 4:17The book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. He opened the book, and found the place where it was written,

 4:18"The Spirit of the Lord is on me,
      Because he anointed me to preach good news to the poor.

 He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
      To proclaim release to the captives,
      Recovering of sight to the blind,
      To deliver those who are crushed,
      4:19And to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord."

4:20He closed the book, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him. 4:21He began to tell them, "Today, this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing."

4:22All testified about him, and wondered at the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth, and they said, "Isn't this Joseph's son?"

4:23He said to them, "Doubtless you will tell me this parable, 'Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we have heard done at Capernaum, do also here in your hometown.'" 4:24He said, "Most assuredly I tell you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown. 4:25But truly I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the the sky was shut up three years and six months, when a great famine came over all the land. 4:26Elijah was sent to none of them, except only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow. 4:27There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian."

4:28They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as they heard these things; 4:29and they rose up, and threw him out of the city, and led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on, that they might throw him off the cliff. 4:30But he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.

4:31He came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. He was teaching them on the Sabbath day, 4:32and they were astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority. 4:33In the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice, 4:34saying, "Ah! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!"

4:35Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be silent, and come out of him!" When the demon had thrown him down in their midst, he came out of him, having done him no harm.

4:36Amazement came on all, and they spoke together, one with another, saying, "What is this word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!" 4:37News about him went out into every place of the surrounding region.

4:38He rose up from the synagogue, and entered into Simon's house. Simon's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they begged him for her. 4:39He stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her. Immediately she rose up and served them. 4:40When the sun was setting, all those who had any sick with various diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. 4:41Demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying, "You are the Christ, the Son of God!" Rebuking them, he didn't allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.

4:42When it was day, he came out and went into an uninhabited place, and the multitudes looked for him, and came to him, and held on to him, so that he wouldn't go away from them. 4:43But he said to them, "I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other cities also. For this reason I have been sent." 4:44He was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

5:1Now it happened, while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret. 5:2He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them, and were washing their nets. 5:3He entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the land. He sat down and taught the multitudes out of the boat. 5:4When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, "Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a catch."

5:5Simon answered him, "Master, we worked all night, and took nothing; but at your word I will let down the net." 5:6When they had done this, they caught a great multitude of fish, and their net was breaking. 5:7They beckoned to their partners in the other boat, that they should come and help them. They came, and filled both boats, so that they began to sink. 5:8But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord." 5:9For he was amazed, and all who were with him, at the catch of fish which they had caught; 5:10and so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon.

Jesus said to Simon, "Don't be afraid. From now on you will catch men alive."

5:11When they had brought their boats to land, they left everything, and followed him. 5:12It happened, while he was in one of the cities, behold, there was a man full of leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell on his face, and begged him, saying, "Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean."

5:13He stretched forth his hand, and touched him, saying, "I want to. Be made clean."

Immediately the leprosy departed from him. 5:14He charged him to "Tell no one, But go your way, and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them." 5:15But the report concerning him spread much more, and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities. 5:16But he withdrew himself into the desert, and prayed.

5:17It happened on one of those days, that he was teaching; and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by, who had come out of every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with him to heal them. 5:18Behold, men brought a paralyzed man on a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before him. 5:19Not finding a way to bring him in because of the multitude, they went up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his cot into the midst before Jesus. 5:20Seeing their faith, he said to him, "Man, your sins are forgiven you."

5:21The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, "Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?"

5:22But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them, "Why are you reasoning so in your hearts? 5:23Which is easier to say, 'Your sins are forgiven you;' or to say, 'Arise and walk?' 5:24But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins" (he said to the paralyzed man), "I tell you, arise, and take up your cot, and go to your house."

5:25Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that which he was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God. 5:26Amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God. They were filled with fear, saying, "We have seen strange things today."

5:27After these things he went out, and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office, and said to him, "Follow me!"

5:28He left everything, and rose up and followed him. 5:29Levi made him a great feast for him in his house. There was a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining with them. 5:30Their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, "Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?" 5:31Jesus answered them, "Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do. 5:32I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

5:33They said to him, "Why do John's disciples often fast and pray, likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?"

5:34He said to them, "Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them? 5:35But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them. Then they will fast in those days." 5:36He also told a parable to them. "No one puts a piece from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the new, and also the piece from the new will not match the old. 5:37No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed. 5:38But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved. 5:39No man having drunk old wine immediately desires new, for he says, 'The old is better.'"

6:1Now it happened on the second Sabbath after the first, that he was going through the grain fields, and his disciples plucked the heads of grain, and ate, rubbing them in their hands. 6:2But some of the Pharisees said to them, "Why do you do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day?"

6:3Jesus, answering them, said, "Haven't you read this, what David did, when he was hungry, he, and those who were with him; 6:4how he entered into the house of God, and took and ate the show bread, and gave also to those who were with him, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests alone?" 6:5He said to them, "The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath."

6:6It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into the synagogue and taught. There was a man there, and his right hand was withered. 6:7The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see whether he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might find an accusation against him. 6:8But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man who had the withered hand, "Rise up, and stand in the middle." He arose and stood. 6:9Then Jesus said to them, "I will ask you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?" 6:10He looked around at them all, and said to him, "Stretch out your hand." He did, and his hand was restored as sound as the other. 6:11But they were filled with rage, and talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus.

6:12It happened in these days, that he went out into the mountain to pray, and he continued all night in prayer to God. 6:13When it was day, he called his disciples, and from them he chose twelve, whom he also named apostles: 6:14Simon, whom he also named Peter; Andrew, his brother; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew; 6:15Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Simon, who was called the Zealot; 6:16Judas the son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor. 6:17He came down with them, and stood on a level place, with a crowd of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:18also those who were troubled with unclean spirits, and they were being healed. 6:19All the multitude sought to touch him, for power came forth from him, and healed them all.

6:20He lifted up his eyes to his disciples, and said,

 "Blessed are you poor,
      For yours is the kingdom of God.

 6:21Blessed are you who hunger now,
      For you will be filled.

 Blessed are you who weep now,
      For you will laugh.

 6:22Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from them and reproach you, and throw out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake.
      6:23Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing to the prophets.

  6:24"But woe to you who are rich!
      For you have received your consolation.

 6:25Woe to you, you who are full now!
      For you will be hungry.

 Woe to you, you who laugh now!
      For you will mourn and weep.

 6:26Woe, when men speak well of you!
      For their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.

6:27"But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, 6:28bless those who curse you, and pray for those who insult you. 6:29To him who strikes you on the cheek, offer also the other; and from him who takes away your cloak, don't withhold your coat also. 6:30Give to everyone who asks you, and don't ask him who takes away your goods to give them back again.

6:31"As you desire that men should do to you, likewise do to them also. 6:32If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them. 6:33If you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same. 6:34If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to receive back as much. 6:35But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back; and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High; for he is kind toward the unthankful and evil.

 6:36Therefore be merciful,
      Even as your Father is also merciful.

 6:37Don't judge,
      And you won't be judged.

 Don't condemn,
      And you won't be condemned.

 Set free,
      And you will be set free.

6:38"Give, and it will be given to you, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, will they give into your bosom. For with the same measure you measure it will be measured back to you."

6:39He spoke a parable to them. "Can the blind guide the blind? Won't they both fall into a pit? 6:40A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher. 6:41Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye? 6:42Or how can you tell your brother, 'Brother, let me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye,' when you yourself don't see the beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye. 6:43For there is no good tree that brings forth rotten fruit; nor again a rotten tree that brings forth good fruit. 6:44For each tree is known by its own fruit. For people don't gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush. 6:45The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the heart, his mouth speaks.

6:46"Why do you call me, 'Lord, Lord,' and don't do the things which I say? 6:47Everyone who comes to me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show you who he is like. 6:48He is like a man building a house, who dug and went deep, and laid a foundation on the rock. When a flood arose, the stream broke against that house, and could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock. 6:49But he who hears, and doesn't do, is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation, against which the stream broke, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great."

7:1After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum. 7:2A certain centurion's servant, who was dear to him, was sick and at the point of death. 7:3When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and save his servant. 7:4When they came to Jesus, they begged him earnestly, saying, "He is worthy for you to do this for him, 7:5for he loves our nation, and he built our synagogue for us." 7:6Jesus went with them. When he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, "Lord, don't trouble yourself, for I am not worthy for you to come under my roof. 7:7Therefore I didn't even think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my servant will be healed. 7:8For I also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go!' and he goes; and to another, 'Come!' and he comes; and to my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it."

7:9When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turned and said to the multitude who followed him, "I tell you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." 7:10Those who were sent, returning to the house, found that the servant who had been sick was well.

7:11It happened soon afterwards, that he went to a city called Nain. Many of his disciples went with him, along with a great multitude. 7:12Now when he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, one who was dead was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. Many people of the city were with her. 7:13When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, "Don't cry." 7:14He came near and touched the coffin, and the bearers stood still. He said, "Young man, I tell you, arise!" 7:15He who was dead sat up, and began to speak. He gave him to his mother.

7:16Fear took hold of all, and they glorified God, saying, "A great prophet has arisen among us!" and, "God has visited his people!" 7:17This report went out concerning him in the whole of Judea, and in all the surrounding region.

7:18The disciples of John told him about all these things. 7:19John, calling to himself two of his disciples, sent them to Jesus, saying, "Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?" 7:20When the men had come to him, they said, "John the Baptizer has sent us to you, saying, 'Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?'"

7:21In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits; and to many who were blind he gave sight. 7:22Jesus answered them, "Go and tell John the things which you have seen and heard: that the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them. 7:23Blessed is he who is not offended by me."

7:24When John's messengers had departed, he began to tell the multitudes about John, "What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 7:25But what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously dressed, and live delicately, are in kings' courts. 7:26But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet. 7:27This is he of whom it is written,

 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
      Who will prepare your way before you.'

7:28"For I tell you, among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer, yet he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he."

7:29When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they justified God, being baptized with John's baptism. 7:30But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God, not being baptized by him themselves.

7:31The Lord said, "To what then will I liken the men of this generation? What are they like? 7:32They are like children who sit in the marketplace, and call one to another, saying, 'We piped to you, and you didn't dance. We mourned, and you didn't weep.' 7:33For John the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, 'He has a demon.' 7:34The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man, and a drunkard; a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' 7:35Wisdom is justified by all her children."

7:36One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. He entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat at the table. 7:37Behold, a woman in the city who was a sinner, when she knew that he was reclining in the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster jar of ointment. 7:38Standing behind at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. 7:39Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw it, he said to himself, "This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived who and what kind of woman this is who touches him, that she is a sinner."

7:40Jesus answered him, "Simon, I have something to tell you."

He said, "Teacher, say on."

7:41"A certain lender had two debtors. The one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty. 7:42When they couldn't pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?"

7:43Simon answered, "He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most."

He said to him, "You have judged correctly." 7:44Turning to the woman, he said to Simon, "Do you see this woman? I entered into your house, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. 7:45You gave me no kiss, but she, since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. 7:46You didn't anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment. 7:47Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little." 7:48He said to her, "Your sins are forgiven."

7:49Those who sat at the table with him began to say to themselves, "Who is this who even forgives sins?"

7:50He said to the woman, "Your faith has saved you. Go in peace."

8:1It happened soon afterwards, that he went about through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the good news of the kingdom of God, and with him the twelve, 8:2and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out; 8:3and Joanna, the wife of Chuzas, Herod's steward; Susanna; and many others; who ministered to them from their possessions. 8:4When a great multitude came together, and people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a parable. 8:5"The farmer went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell by the road, and it was trampled under foot, and the birds of the sky devoured it. 8:6Other seed fell on the rock, and as soon as it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture. 8:7Other fell amid the thorns, and the thorns grew with it, and choked it. 8:8Other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit one hundred times." As he said these things, he called out, "He who has ears to hear, let him hear!"

8:9Then his disciples asked him, "What does this parable mean?"

8:10He said, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest in parables; that 'seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.' 8:11Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. 8:12Those by the road are those who hear, then the devil comes, and takes away the word from their heart, that they may not believe and be saved. 8:13Those on the rock are they who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; but these have no root, who believe for a while, and fall away in time of temptation. 8:14That which fell among the thorns, these are those who have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares, riches, and pleasures of life, and bring no fruit to maturity. 8:15That in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it tightly, and bring forth fruit with patience.

8:16"No one, when he has lit a lamp, covers it with a container, or puts it under a bed; but puts it on a stand, that those who enter in may see the light. 8:17For nothing is hidden, that will not be revealed; nor anything secret, that will not be known and come to light. 8:18Be careful therefore how you hear. For whoever has, to him will be given; and whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he thinks he has."

8:19His mother and brothers came to him, and they could not come near him for the crowd. 8:20It was told him by some saying, "Your mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you."

8:21But he answered them, "My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God, and do it."

8:22Now it happened on one of those days, that he entered into a boat, himself and his disciples, and he said to them, "Let's go over to the other side of the lake." So they launched out. 8:23But as they sailed, he fell asleep. A wind storm came down on the lake, and they were taking on dangerous amounts of water. 8:24They came to him, and awoke him, saying, "Master, master, we are dying!" He awoke, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it was calm. 8:25He said to them, "Where is your faith?" Being afraid they marveled, saying one to another, "Who is this, then, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?" 8:26They arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.

8:27When Jesus stepped ashore, a certain man out of the city met him, who had demons for a long time. He wore no clothes, and didn't live in a house, but in the tombs. 8:28When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, "What do I have to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't torment me!" 8:29For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For the unclean spirit had often seized the man. He was kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters. Breaking the bands apart, he was driven by the demon into the desert.

8:30Jesus asked him, "What is your name?"

He said, "Legion," for many demons had entered into him. 8:31They begged him that he would not command them to go into the abyss. 8:32Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the mountain, and they begged him that he would allow them to enter into those. He allowed them. 8:33The demons came out from the man, and entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake, and were drowned. 8:34When those who fed them saw what had happened, they fled, and told it in the city and in the country.

8:35People went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus, and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind, at the feet of Jesus; and they were afraid. 8:36Those who saw it told them how he who was possessed by demons was healed. 8:37All the people of the surrounding country of the Gadarenes asked him to depart from them, for they were very much afraid. He entered into the boat, and returned. 8:38But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him that he might go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying, 8:39"Return to your house, and declare what great things God has done for you." He went his way, proclaiming throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.

8:40It happened, as Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him. 8:41Behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus' feet, and begged him to come into his house, 8:42for he had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. But as he went, the multitudes thronged him. 8:43A woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and could not be healed by any, 8:44came behind him, and touched the fringe of his cloak, and immediately the flow of her blood stopped. 8:45Jesus said, "Who touched me?"

When all denied, Peter and those with him said, "Master, the multitudes press and jostle you, and you say, 'Who touched me?'"

8:46But Jesus said, "Someone did touch me, for I perceived that power has gone out of me." 8:47When the woman saw that she was not hidden, she came trembling, and falling down before him declared to him in the presence of all the people the reason why she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately. 8:48He said to her, "Daughter, cheer up. Your faith has made you well. Go in peace."

8:49While he still spoke, one from the ruler of the synagogue's house came, saying to him, "Your daughter is dead. Don't trouble the Teacher."

8:50But Jesus hearing it, answered him, "Don't be afraid. Only believe, and she will be healed."

8:51When he came to the house, he didn't allow anyone to enter in, except Peter, John, James, the father of the girl, and her mother. 8:52All were weeping and mourning her, but he said, "Don't weep. She isn't dead, but sleeping."

8:53They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. 8:54But he put them all outside, and taking her by the hand, he called, saying, "Little girl, arise!" 8:55Her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately. He commanded that something be given to her to eat. 8:56Her parents were amazed, but he charged them to tell no one what had been done.

9:1He called the twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases. 9:2He sent them forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. 9:3He said to them, "Take nothing for your journey -- neither staffs, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats apiece. 9:4Into whatever house you enter, stay there, and depart from there. 9:5As many as don't receive you, when you depart from that city, shake off even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them."

9:6They departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere. 9:7Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him; and he was very perplexed, because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead, 9:8and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that one of the old prophets had risen again. 9:9Herod said, "John I beheaded, but who is this, about whom I hear such things?" He sought to see him. 9:10The apostles, when they had returned, told him what things they had done.

He took them, and withdrew apart to a deserted place of a city called Bethsaida. 9:11But the multitudes, perceiving it, followed him. He welcomed them, and spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and he cured those who needed healing. 9:12The day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said to him, "Send the multitude away, that they may go into the surrounding villages and farms, and lodge, and get provisions, for we are here in a desert place."

9:13But he said to them, "You give them something to eat."

They said, "We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we should go and buy food for all these people." 9:14For they were about five thousand men.

He said to his disciples, "Make them sit down in groups of about fifty each." 9:15They did so, and made them all sit down. 9:16He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to the sky, he blessed them, and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude. 9:17They ate, and were all filled. They gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over.

9:18It happened, as he was praying alone, the disciples were with him, and he asked them, "Who do the multitudes say that I am?"

9:19They answered, "'John the Baptizer,' but others say, 'Elijah,' and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again."

9:20He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?"

Peter answered, "The Christ of God."

9:21But he warned them, and commanded them to tell this to no one, 9:22saying, "The Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up." 9:23He said to all, "If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me. 9:24For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life for my sake, the same will save it. 9:25For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world, and loses or forfeits his own self? 9:26For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of himself, of the Father, and of the holy angels. 9:27But I tell you the truth: There are some of those who stand here, who will in no way taste of death, until they see the kingdom of God."

9:28It happened about eight days after these sayings, that he took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up onto the mountain to pray. 9:29As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became white and dazzling. 9:30Behold, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elijah, 9:31who appeared in glory, and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.

9:32Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him. 9:33It happened, as they were parting from him, that Peter said to Jesus, "Master, it is good for us to be here. Let's make three tents: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah," not knowing what he said.

9:34While he said these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud. 9:35A voice came out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son. Listen to him!" 9:36When the voice came, Jesus was found alone. They were silent, and told no one in those days any of the things which they had seen.

9:37It happened on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, that a great multitude met him. 9:38Behold, a man from the crowd called out, saying, "Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child. 9:39Behold, a spirit takes him, he suddenly cries out, and it convulses him so that he foams, and it hardly departs from him, bruising him severely. 9:40I begged your disciples to cast it out, and they couldn't."

9:41Jesus answered, "Faithless and perverse generation, how long will I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here."

9:42While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him violently. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father. 9:43They were all astonished at the majesty of God.

But while all were marveling at all the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples, 9:44"Let these words sink into your ears, for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men." 9:45But they didn't understand this saying. It was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.

9:46There arose an argument among them about which of them was the greatest. 9:47Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their heart, took a little child, and set him by his side, 9:48and said to them, "Whoever receives this little child in my name receives me. Whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For whoever is least among you all, this one will be great."

9:49John answered, "Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow with us."

9:50Jesus said to him, "Don't forbid him, for he who is not against us is for us."

9:51It came to pass, when the days were near that he should be taken up, he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem, 9:52and sent messengers before his face. They went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him. 9:53They didn't receive him, because he was traveling with his face set towards Jerusalem. 9:54When his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, "Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down from the sky, and destroy them, just as Elijah did?"

9:55But he turned and rebuked them, "You don't know what kind of spirit you are of. 9:56For the Son of Man didn't come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."

They went to another village. 9:57As they went on the way, a certain man said to him, "I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord."

9:58Jesus said to him, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head."

9:59He said to another, "Follow me!"

But he said, "Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."

9:60But Jesus said to him, "Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but you go and announce the kingdom of God."

9:61Another also said, "I want to follow you, Lord, but first allow me to bid farewell to those who are at my house."

9:62But Jesus said to him, "No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God."

10:1Now after these things the Lord also appointed seventy others, and sent them two by two before his face into every city and place, where he himself was about to come. 10:2Then he said to them, "The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he may send out laborers into his harvest. 10:3Go your ways. Behold, I send you out as lambs in the midst of wolves. 10:4Carry no purse, nor wallet, nor sandals. Greet no one on the way. 10:5Into whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house.' 10:6If a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you. 10:7Remain in that same house, eating and drinking the things they give, for the laborer is worthy of his wages. Don't go from house to house. 10:8Into whatever city you enter, and they receive you, eat the things that are set before you. 10:9Heal the sick who are therein, and tell them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you.' 10:10But into whatever city you enter, and they don't receive you, go out into the streets of it and say, 10:11'Even the dust from your city that clings to us, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God has come near to you.' 10:12I tell you, it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city.

10:13"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. 10:14But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you. 10:15You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades. 10:16Whoever listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me. Whoever rejects me rejects him who sent me."

10:17The seventy returned with joy, saying, "Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your name!"

10:18He said to them, "I saw Satan having fallen like lightning from heaven. 10:19Behold, I give you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. Nothing will in any way hurt you. 10:20Nevertheless, don't rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven."

10:21In that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, "I thank you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight."

10:22Turning to the disciples, he said, "All things have been delivered to me from my Father. No one knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever the Son desires to reveal him."

10:23Turning to the disciples, he said privately, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see, 10:24for I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them."

10:25Behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tested him, saying, "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

10:26He said to him, "What is written in the law? How do you read it?"

10:27He answered, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbor as yourself."

10:28He said to him, "You have answered correctly. Do this, and you will live."

10:29But he, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, "Who is my neighbor?"

10:30Jesus answered, "A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 10:31By chance a certain priest was going down that way. When he saw him, he passed by on the other side. 10:32In the same way a Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side. 10:33But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was. When he saw him, he was moved with compassion, 10:34came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. He set him on his own animal, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 10:35On the next day, when he departed, he took out two denarii, and gave them to the host, and said to him, 'Take care of him. Whatever you spend beyond that, I will repay you when I return.' 10:36Now which of these three do you think seemed to be a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers?"

10:37He said, "He who showed mercy on him."

Then Jesus said to him, "Go and do likewise."

10:38It happened as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. 10:39She had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus' feet, and heard his word. 10:40But Martha was distracted with much serving, and she came up to him, and said, "Lord, don't you care that my sister left me to serve alone? Ask her therefore to help me."

10:41Jesus answered her, "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things, 10:42but one thing is needed. Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her."

11:1It happened, that when he finished praying in a certain place, one of his disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also taught his disciples."

11:2He said to them, "When you pray, say,

 'Our Father in heaven,
      May your name be kept holy.

 May your kingdom come.
      May your desire be done on Earth, as it is in heaven.

 11:3Give us day by day our daily bread.

 11:4Forgive us our sins,
      For we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us.

 Bring us not into temptation,
      But deliver us from the evil one.'"

11:5He said to them, "Which of you, if you go to a friend at midnight, and tell him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves of bread, 11:6for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him,' 11:7and he from within will answer and say, 'Don't bother me. The door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I can't get up and give it to you'? 11:8I tell you, although he will not rise and give it to him because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence, he will get up and give him as many as he needs.

11:9"I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you. Keep seeking, and you will find. Keep knocking, and it will be opened to you. 11:10For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.

11:11"Which of you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he won't give him a snake instead of a fish, will he? 11:12Or if he asks for an egg, he won't give him a scorpion, will he? 11:13If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?"

11:14He was casting out a demon, and it was mute. It happened, when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke; and the multitudes marveled. 11:15But some of them said, "He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons." 11:16Others, testing him, sought from him a sign from heaven. 11:17But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation. A house divided against itself falls. 11:18If Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? Because you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul. 11:19But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore will they be your judges. 11:20But if I by the finger of God cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come to you.

11:21"When the strong man, fully armed, guards his own dwelling, his goods are safe. 11:22But when someone stronger comes on him, and overcomes him, he takes from him his whole armor in which he trusted, and divides his spoils.

11:23"He that is not with me is against me. He who doesn't gather with me scatters. 11:24The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of the man, passes through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, he says, 'I will turn back to my house whence I came out.' 11:25When he returns, he finds it swept and put in order. 11:26Then he goes, and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first."

11:27It came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, "Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!"

11:28But he said, "On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God, and keep it."

11:29When the multitudes were gathering together to him, he began to say, "This is an evil generation. It seeks after a sign. No sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah, the prophet. 11:30For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will also the Son of Man be to this generation. 11:31The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, one greater than Solomon is here. 11:32The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, one greater than Jonah is here.

11:33"No man, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a cellar, nor under a basket, but on a stand, that they which enter in may see the light. 11:34The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore when your eye is good, your whole body is also full of light; but when it is evil, your body also is full of darkness. 11:35Therefore see whether the light that is in you isn't darkness. 11:36If therefore your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly full of light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light."

11:37Now as he spoke, a certain Pharisee asked him to dine with him. He went in, and sat at the table. 11:38When the Pharisee saw it, he marveled that he had not first washed himself before dinner. 11:39The Lord said to him, "Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your inward part is full of extortion and wickedness. 11:40You foolish ones, didn't he who made the outside make the inside also? 11:41But give for gifts to the needy those things which are within, and behold, all things will be clean to you. 11:42But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, and bypass justice and the love of God. You ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone. 11:43Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues, and the greetings in the marketplaces. 11:44Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like hidden graves, and the men who walk over them don't know it."

11:45One of the lawyers answered him, "Teacher, in saying this you insult us also."

11:46He said, "Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves won't even lift one finger to help carry those burdens. 11:47Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them. 11:48So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers. For they killed them, and you build their tombs. 11:49Therefore also the wisdom of God said, 'I will send to them prophets and apostles; and some of them they will kill and persecute, 11:50that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation; 11:51from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary.' Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation. 11:52Woe to you lawyers! For you took away the key of knowledge. You didn't enter in yourselves, and those who were entering in, you hindered."

11:53As he said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be terribly angry, and to draw many things out of him; 11:54laying in wait for him, and seeking to catch him in something he might say, that they might accuse him.

12:1Meanwhile, when a multitude of many thousands had gathered together, so much so that they trampled on each other, he began to tell his disciples first of all, "Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 12:2But there is nothing covered up, that will not be revealed, nor hidden, that will not be known. 12:3Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light. What you have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers will be proclaimed on the housetops.

12:4"I tell you, my friends, don't be afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. 12:5But I will warn you whom you shall fear. Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into Gehenna. Yes, I tell you, fear him.

12:6"Aren't five sparrows sold for two assaria? Not one of them is forgotten by God. 12:7But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows.

12:8"I tell you, everyone who confesses me before men, him will the Son of Man also confess before the angels of God; 12:9but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the angels of God. 12:10Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven. 12:11When they bring you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, don't be anxious how or what you will answer, or what you will say; 12:12for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what you must say."

12:13One of the multitude said to him, "Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."

12:14But he said to him, "Man, who made me a judge or an arbitrator over you?" 12:15He said to them, "Beware! Keep yourselves from covetousness, for a man's life doesn't consist of the abundance of the things which he possesses."

12:16He spoke a parable to them, saying, "The ground of a certain rich man brought forth abundantly. 12:17He reasoned within himself, saying, 'What will I do, because I don't have room to store my crops?' 12:18He said, 'This is what I will do. I will pull down my barns, and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods. 12:19I will tell my soul, "Soul, you have many goods laid up for many years. Take your ease, eat, drink, be merry."'

12:20"But God said to him, 'You foolish one, tonight your soul is required of you. The things which you have prepared -- whose will they be?' 12:21So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God."

12:22He said to his disciples, "Therefore I tell you, don't be anxious for your life, what you will eat, nor yet for your body, what you will wear. 12:23Life is more than food, and the body than clothing. 12:24Consider the ravens: they don't sow, they don't reap, they have no warehouse or barn, and God feeds them. How much more valuable are you than birds! 12:25Which of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his height? 12:26If then you aren't able to do even the least things, why are you anxious about the rest? 12:27Consider the lilies, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin; yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 12:28But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, ones of little faith? 12:29Don't seek what you will eat or what you will drink; neither be anxious. 12:30For the nations of the world seek after all of these things, but your Father knows that you need these things. 12:31Yet seek God's kingdom, and all these things will be added to you. 12:32Don't be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 12:33Sell that which you have, and give gifts to the needy. Make for yourselves purses which don't grow old, a treasure in the heavens that doesn't fail, where no thief approaches, neither moth destroys. 12:34For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

12:35"Let your loins be girded and your lamps burning. 12:36Be like men looking for their lord, when he will return from the marriage feast; that, when he comes and knocks, they may immediately open to him. 12:37Blessed are those servants, whom the lord will find watching when he comes. Most assuredly I tell you, that he will dress himself, and make them recline, and will come and serve them. 12:38They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third watch, and finds them so. 12:39But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched, and not allowed his house to be broken into. 12:40Therefore be ready also, for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you don't expect him."

12:41Peter said to him, "Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everybody?"

12:42The Lord said, "Who then is the faithful and wise steward, whom his lord will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the right times? 12:43Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes. 12:44Truly I tell you, that he will set him over all that he has. 12:45But if that servant says in his heart, 'My lord delays his coming,' and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken, 12:46then the lord of that servant will come in a day when he isn't expecting him, and in an hour that he doesn't know, and will cut him apart, and place his portion with the unfaithful. 12:47That servant, who knew his lord's will, and didn't prepare, nor do what he wanted, will be beaten with many stripes, 12:48but he who didn't know, and did things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few stripes. To whoever much is given, of him will much be required; and to whom they deposit much, of him will they ask more.

12:49"I came to throw fire on the earth. I wish it were already kindled. 12:50But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished! 12:51Do you think that I have come to give peace in the earth? I tell you, no, but rather division. 12:52For from now on, there will be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. 12:53They will be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law."

12:54He said to the multitudes also, "When you see a cloud rising from the west, immediately you say, 'A shower is coming,' and so it happens. 12:55When a south wind blows, you say, 'There will be a scorching heat,' and it happens. 12:56You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how is it that you don't interpret this time? 12:57Why don't you judge for yourselves what is right? 12:58For as you are going with your adversary before the magistrate, try diligently on the way to be freed from him, lest perhaps he drag you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison. 12:59I tell you, you will by no means get out of there, until you have paid the very last penny."

13:1Now there were some present at the same time who told him about the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices. 13:2Jesus answered them, "Do you think that these Galilaeans were worse sinners than all the other Galilaeans, because they suffered such things? 13:3I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way. 13:4Or those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think that they were worse offenders than all the men who dwell in Jerusalem? 13:5I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way."

13:6He spoke this parable. "A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none. 13:7He said to the vine dresser, 'Behold, these three years I came seeking fruit on this fig tree, and found none. Cut it down. Why does it waste the soil?' 13:8He answered, 'Lord, leave it alone this year also, until I dig around it, and fertilize it. 13:9If it bears fruit, fine; but if not, after that, you can cut it down.'"

13:10He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day. 13:11Behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was bent over, and could in no way straighten herself up. 13:12When Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, "Woman, you are freed from your infirmity." 13:13He laid his hands on her, and immediately she stood up straight, and glorified God.

13:14The ruler of the synagogue, being moved with indignation because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the multitude, "There are six days in which men ought to work. Therefore come on those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day!"

13:15Therefore the Lord answered him, "You hypocrites! Doesn't each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the Sabbath, and lead him away to water? 13:16Ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound eighteen long years, be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?"

13:17As he said these things, all his adversaries were put to shame, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.

13:18He said, "What is the kingdom of God like? To what shall I compare it? 13:19It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and threw into his own garden. It grew, and became a large tree, and the birds of the sky lodged in the branches of it."

13:20Again he said, "What shall I compare to the kingdom of God? 13:21It is like yeast, which a woman took and hid in three sata of flour, until it was all leavened."

13:22He went on his way through cities and villages, teaching, and traveling on to Jerusalem. 13:23One said to him, "Lord, are they few who are saved?"

He said to them, 13:24"Strive to enter in by the narrow door, for many, I tell you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able. 13:25When once the master of the house has risen up, and has shut the door, and you begin to stand outside, and to knock at the door, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us!' then he will answer and tell you, 'I don't know you or where you come from.' 13:26Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drink in your presence, and you taught in our streets.' 13:27He will say, 'I tell you, I don't know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.' 13:28There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and yourselves being thrown outside. 13:29They will come from the east, west, north, and south, and will sit down in the kingdom of God. 13:30Behold, there are some who are last who will be first, and there are some who are first who will be last."

13:31On that same day, some Pharisees came, saying to him, "Get out of here, and go away, for Herod wants to kill you."

13:32He said to them, "Go and tell that fox, 'Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I complete my mission. 13:33Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, for it can't be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.'

13:34"Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children together, like a hen gathers her own brood under her wings, and you refused! 13:35Behold, your house is left to you desolate. I tell you, you will not see me, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!'"

14:1It happened, when he went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him. 14:2Behold, a certain man who had dropsy was in front of him. 14:3Jesus, answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?"

14:4But they were silent.

He took him, and healed him, and let him go. 14:5He answered them, "Which of you, if your son or an ox fell into a well, wouldn't immediately pull him out on a Sabbath day?"

14:6They couldn't answer him regarding these things.

14:7He spoke a parable to those who were invited, when he noticed how they chose the best seats, and said to them, 14:8"When you are invited by anyone to a marriage feast, don't sit in the best seat, since perhaps a more honorable man than you might be invited by him, 14:9and he who invited both of you would come and tell you, 'Make room for this man.' Then you would begin, with shame, to take the lowest place. 14:10But when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that when he who invited you comes, he may tell you, 'Friend, move up higher.' Then you will have glory in the presence of all who sit at the table with you. 14:11For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted."

14:12He also said to the one who had invited him, "When you make a dinner or a supper, don't call your friends, nor your brothers, nor your kinsmen, nor rich neighbors, or perhaps they might also return the favor, and pay you back. 14:13But when you make a feast, ask the poor, the maimed, the lame, or the blind; 14:14and you will be blessed, because they don't have the resources to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous."

14:15When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these things, he said to him, "Blessed is he who will feast in the kingdom of God!"

14:16But he said to him, "A certain man made a great supper, and he invited many people. 14:17He sent out his servant at supper time to tell those who were invited, 'Come, for everything is ready now.' 14:18They all as one began to make excuses.

"The first said to him, 'I have bought a field, and I must go and see it. Please have me excused.'

14:19"Another said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I must go try them out. Please have me excused.'

14:20"Another said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I can't come.'

14:21"That servant came, and told his lord these things. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in here the poor, maimed, blind, and lame.'

14:22"The servant said, 'Lord, it is done as you commanded, and there is still room.'

14:23"The lord said to the servant, 'Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. 14:24For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper.'"

14:25Now great multitudes went with him. He turned and said to them, 14:26"If anyone comes to me, and doesn't hate his own father, mother, wife, children, brothers, and sisters, yes, and his own life also, he can't be my disciple. 14:27Whoever doesn't bear his own cross, and come after me, can't be my disciple. 14:28For which of you, desiring to build a tower, doesn't first sit down and count the cost, to see if he has enough to complete it? 14:29Or perhaps, when he has laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, everyone who sees begins to mock him, 14:30saying, 'This man began to build, and wasn't able to finish.' 14:31Or what king, as he goes to encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and consider whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand? 14:32Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an envoy, and asks for conditions of peace. 14:33So therefore whoever of you who doesn't renounce all that he has, he can't be my disciple. 14:34Salt is good, but if the salt becomes flat and tasteless, with what do you season it? 14:35It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile. It is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear."

15:1Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to him to hear him. 15:2The Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, "This man welcomes sinners, and eats with them."

15:3He told them this parable. 15:4"Which of you men, if you had one hundred sheep, and lost one of them, wouldn't leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one that was lost, until he found it? 15:5When he has found it, he carries it on his shoulders, rejoicing. 15:6When he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbors, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!' 15:7I tell you that even so there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous people who need no repentance. 15:8Or what woman, if she had ten drachma coins, if she lost one drachma, wouldn't light a lamp, sweep the house, and seek diligently until she found it? 15:9When she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost.' 15:10Even so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner repenting."

15:11He said, "A certain man had two sons. 15:12The younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me my share of your property.' He divided his living to them. 15:13Not many days after, the younger son gathered all of this together and took his journey into a far country. There he wasted his property with riotous living. 15:14When he had spent all of it, there arose a severe famine in that country, and he began to be in need. 15:15He went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed pigs. 15:16He wanted to fill his belly with the husks that the pigs ate, but no one gave him any. 15:17But when he came to himself he said, 'How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough to spare, and I'm dying with hunger! 15:18I will get up and go to my father, and will tell him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight. 15:19I am no more worthy to be called your son. Make me as one of your hired servants."' 15:20He arose, and came to his father. But while he was still far off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. 15:21The son said to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight. I am no more worthy to be called your son.' 15:22But the father said to his servants, 'Bring out the best robe, and put it on him. Put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. 15:23Bring the fattened calf, kill it, and let us eat, and celebrate; 15:24for this, my son, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.' They began to be merry.

15:25"Now his elder son was in the field. As he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing. 15:26He called one of the servants to him, and asked what was going on. 15:27He said to him, 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him safe and sound.' 15:28But he was angry, and would not go in. Therefore his father came out, and begged him. 15:29But he answered his father, 'Behold, these many years I served you, and I never disobeyed a commandment of yours, and you never gave me a goat, that I might celebrate with my friends. 15:30But when this, your son, came, who has devoured your living with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him.' 15:31He said to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours. 15:32But it was appropriate to celebrate and be glad, for this, your brother, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.'"

16:1He said also to his disciples, "There was a certain rich man, who had a manager. The same was accused to him of wasting his possessions. 16:2He called him, and said to him, 'What is this that I hear about you? Give an accounting of your management, for you can no longer be manager.'

16:3"The steward said within himself, 'What will I do, seeing that my lord is taking away the management position from me? I don't have strength to dig. I am ashamed to beg. 16:4I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from management, they may receive me into their houses.' 16:5Calling each one of his lord's debtors to him, he said to the first, 'How much do you owe to my lord?' 16:6He said, 'A hundred batos of oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.' 16:7Then said he to another, 'How much do you owe?' He said, 'A hundred cors of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and write eighty.'

16:8"His lord commended the unrighteous steward because he had done wisely, for the sons of this world are, in their own generation, wiser than the sons of the light. 16:9I tell you, make for yourselves friends by means of unrighteous mammon, so that when you fail, they may receive you into the eternal tents. 16:10He who is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much. He who is unrighteous in a very little is also unrighteous in much. 16:11If therefore you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? 16:12If you have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own? 16:13No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. You aren't able to serve God and mammon."

16:14The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, also heard all these things, and they scoffed at him. 16:15He said to them, "You are those who justify yourselves in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts. For that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God. 16:16The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the gospel of the kingdom of God is preached, and everyone is forcing his way into it. 16:17But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the law to fall. 16:18Everyone who divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery. He who marries one who is put away from a husband commits adultery.

16:19"Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and fine linen, living in luxury every day. 16:20A certain beggar, named Lazarus, was laid at his gate, full of sores, 16:21and desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. Yes, even the dogs came and licked his sores. 16:22It happened that the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels to Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried. 16:23In Hades, he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and saw Abraham far off, and Lazarus at his bosom. 16:24He cried and said, 'Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue! For I am in anguish in this flame.'

16:25"But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that you, in your lifetime, received your good things, and Lazarus, in like manner, bad things. But now here he is comforted and you are in anguish. 16:26Besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that those who want to pass from here to you are not able, and that none may cross over from there to us.'

16:27"He said, 'I ask you therefore, father, that you would send him to my father's house; 16:28for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, lest they also come into this place of torment.'

16:29"But Abraham said to him, 'They have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them.'

16:30"He said, 'No, father Abraham, but if one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.'

16:31"He said to him, 'If they don't listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rises from the dead.'"

17:1He said to the disciples, "It is impossible that occasions of stumbling should not come, but woe to him through whom they come! 17:2It would be better for him if a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble. 17:3Be careful. If your brother sins against you, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him. 17:4If he sins against you seven times in the day, and seven times turns again, saying, 'I repent,' you shall forgive him."

17:5The apostles said to the Lord, "Increase our faith."

17:6The Lord said, "If you had faith as a grain of mustard seed, you would tell this sycamore tree, 'Be uprooted, and be planted in the sea,' and it would obey you. 17:7But who is there of you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say, when he comes in from the field, 'Come immediately and sit down at the table,' 17:8and will not rather tell him, 'Prepare my supper, clothe yourself properly, and serve me, while I eat and drink. Afterward you will eat and drink?' 17:9Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded? I think not. 17:10Even so you also, when you have done all the things that are commanded you, say, 'We are unworthy servants. We have done our duty.'"

17:11It happened, as he was on his way to Jerusalem, that he was passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee. 17:12As he entered into a certain village, ten men who were lepers met him, who stood far away. 17:13They lifted up their voices, saying, "Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!"

17:14When he saw them, he said to them, "Go and show yourselves to the priests." It happened, as they went, they were cleansed. 17:15One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice. 17:16He fell on his face at his feet, giving him thanks. He was a Samaritan. 17:17Jesus answered, "Weren't the ten cleansed? But where are the nine? 17:18Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this stranger?" 17:19He said to him, "Get up, and go your way. Your faith has healed you."

17:20Being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, he answered them, "The kingdom of God doesn't come with observation; 17:21neither will they say, 'Look, here!' or, 'Look, there!' for behold, the kingdom of God is within you."

17:22He said to the disciples, "The days will come, when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it. 17:23They will tell you, 'Look, here!' or 'Look, there!' Don't go away, nor follow after them, 17:24for as the lightning, when it flashes out of the one part under the sky, shines to the other part under the sky; so will the Son of Man be in his day. 17:25But first, he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation. 17:26As it happened in the days of Noah, even so will it be also in the days of the Son of Man. 17:27They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. 17:28Likewise, even as it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built; 17:29but in the day that Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur from the sky, and destroyed them all. 17:30It will be the same way in the day that the Son of Man is revealed. 17:31In that day, he who will be on the housetop, and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away. Let him who is in the field likewise not turn back. 17:32Remember Lot's wife! 17:33Whoever seeks to gain his life loses it, but whoever loses his life preserves it. 17:34I tell you, in that night there will be two people in one bed. The one will be taken, and the other will be left. 17:35There will be two women grinding together. The one will be taken, and the other will be left." 17:36*

17:37They answering, asked him, "Where, Lord?"

He said to them, "Where the body is, there will the vultures also be gathered together."

18:1He also spoke a parable to them that they must always pray, and not give up, 18:2saying, "A certain judge was in a city, who didn't fear God, and didn't respect man. 18:3A widow was in that city, and she came often to him, saying, 'Defend me from my adversary!' 18:4He wouldn't for a while, but afterward he said to himself, 'Though I don't fear God, nor respect man, 18:5yet because this widow bothers me, I will defend her, or else she will wear me out by her continual coming.'"

18:6The Lord said, "Listen to what the unrighteous judge says. 18:7Won't God avenge his elect, who are crying out to him day and night, and yet he exercises patience with them? 18:8I tell you that he will avenge them quickly. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?"

18:9He spoke also this parable to certain people who were convinced of their own righteousness, and who despised all others. 18:10"Two men went up into the temple to pray; one was a Pharisee, and the other was a tax collector. 18:11The Pharisee stood and prayed to himself like this: 'God, I thank you, that I am not like the rest of men, extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this tax collector. 18:12I fast twice in the week. I give tithes of all that I get.' 18:13But the tax collector, standing far away, wouldn't even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, 'God, be merciful to me, a sinner!' 18:14I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted."

18:15They were also bringing their babies to him, that he might touch them. But when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 18:16Jesus called them near, saying, "Allow the little children to come to me, and don't hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to ones like these. 18:17Most assuredly, I tell you, whoever doesn't receive the kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it."

18:18A certain ruler asked him, saying, "Good Teacher, what do I do to inherit eternal life?"

18:19Jesus asked him, "Why do you call me good? No one is good, except one -- God. 18:20You know the commandments: 'Don't commit adultery,' 'Don't murder,' 'Don't steal,' 'Don't give false testimony,' 'Honor your father and your mother.'"

18:21He said, "I have observed all these things from my youth up."

18:22When Jesus heard these things, he said to him, "You still lack one thing. Sell all that you have, and distribute it to the poor. You will have treasure in heaven. Come, follow me."

18:23But when he heard these things, he became very sad, for he was very rich.

18:24Jesus, seeing that he became very sad, said, "How hard it is for those who have riches to enter into the kingdom of God! 18:25For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

18:26Those who heard it said, "Then who can be saved?"

18:27But he said, "The things which are impossible with men are possible with God."

18:28Peter said, "Look, we have left everything, and followed you."

18:29He said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, 18:30who will not receive many times more in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life."

18:31He took the twelve aside, and said to them, "Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the prophets concerning the Son of Man will be completed. 18:32For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, will be mocked, treated shamefully, and spit on. 18:33They will scourge and kill him. On the third day, he will rise again."

18:34They understood none of these things. This saying was hidden from them, and they didn't understand the things that were said. 18:35It happened, as he came near Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the road, begging. 18:36Hearing a multitude going by, he asked what this meant. 18:37They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by. 18:38He cried out, "Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!" 18:39Those who led the way rebuked him, that he should be quiet; but he cried out all the more, "You son of David, have mercy on me!"

18:40Jesus, standing, commanded him to be brought to him. When he had come near, he asked him, 18:41"What do you want me to do?"

He said, "Lord, that I may see again."

18:42Jesus said to him, "Receive your sight. Your faith has healed you."

18:43Immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God. All the people, when they saw it, praised God.

19:1He entered and was passing through Jericho. 19:2There was a man named Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector, and he was rich. 19:3He was trying to see who Jesus was, and couldn't because of the crowd, because he was short. 19:4He ran on ahead, and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way. 19:5When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said to him, "Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for today I must stay at your house." 19:6He hurried, came down, and received him joyfully. 19:7When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, "He has gone in to lodge with a man who is a sinner."

19:8Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, "Behold, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor. If I have wrongfully exacted anything of anyone, I restore four times as much."

19:9Jesus said to him, "Today, salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham. 19:10For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost."

19:11As they heard these things, he went on and told a parable, because he was near Jerusalem, and they supposed that the kingdom of God would be revealed immediately. 19:12He said therefore, "A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. 19:13He called ten servants of his, and gave them ten minas, and told them, 'Conduct business until I come.' 19:14But his citizens hated him, and sent an envoy after him, saying, 'We don't want this man to reign over us.'

19:15"It happened, when he had come back again, having received the kingdom, that he commanded these servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by conducting business. 19:16The first came before him, saying, 'Lord, your mina has made ten more minas.'

19:17"He said to him, 'Well done, you good servant! Because you were found faithful in a very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.'

19:18"The second came, saying, 'Your mina, Lord, has made five minas.'

19:19"He said to him also, 'You also are to be over five cities.' 19:20Another came, saying, 'Lord, behold, your mina, which I kept laid away in a handkerchief, 19:21for I feared you, because you are an exacting man. You take up that which you didn't lay down, and reap that which you didn't sow.'

19:22"He said to him, 'Out of your own mouth will I judge you, you wicked servant! You knew that I am an exacting man, taking up that which I didn't lay down, and reaping that which I didn't sow. 19:23Then why didn't you deposit my money in the bank, and I at my coming might have earned interest on it?' 19:24He said to those who stood by, 'Take the mina away from him, and give it to him who has the ten minas.'

19:25"They said to him, 'Lord, he has ten minas!' 19:26'For I tell you that to everyone who has, will more be given; but from him who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away from him. 19:27But bring those enemies of mine who didn't want me to reign over them here, and kill them before me.'" 19:28When he had thus spoken, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.

19:29It happened, when he drew near to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the mountain that is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples, 19:30saying, "Go your way into the village on the other side, in which, as you enter, you will find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat. Untie him, and bring him. 19:31If anyone asks you, 'Why are you untying it?' say to him: 'The Lord needs it.'"

19:32Those who were sent went away, and found things just as he had told them. 19:33As they were untying the colt, the owners of it said to them, 'Why are you untying the colt?' 19:34They said, 'The Lord needs it.' 19:35They brought it to Jesus. They threw their cloaks on the colt, and set Jesus on them. 19:36As he went, they spread their cloaks in the way. 19:37As he was now getting near, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen, 19:38saying, "Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!"

19:39Some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him, "Teacher, rebuke your disciples!"

19:40He answered them, "I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out."

19:41When he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it, 19:42saying, "If you, even you, had known today the things which belong to your peace! But now, they are hidden from your eyes. 19:43For the days will come on you, when your enemies will throw up a barricade against you, surround you, hem you in on every side, 19:44and will dash you and your children within you to the ground. They will not leave in you one stone on another, because you didn't know the time of your visitation."

19:45He entered into the temple, and began to drive out those who bought and sold in it, 19:46saying to them, "It is written, 'My house is a house of prayer,' but you have made it a 'den of robbers'!"

19:47He was teaching daily in the temple, but the chief priests and the scribes and the leading men among the people sought to destroy him. 19:48They couldn't find what they might do, for all the people hung on to every word that he said.

20:1It happened on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the gospel, that the chief priests and scribes came to him with the elders. 20:2They asked him, "Tell us: by what authority do you do these things? Or who is giving you this authority?"

20:3He answered them, "I also will ask you one question. Tell me: 20:4the baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?"

20:5They reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we say, 'From heaven,' he will say, 'Why didn't you believe him?' 20:6But if we say, 'From men,' all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet." 20:7They answered that they didn't know where it was from.

20:8Jesus said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things."

20:9He began to tell the people this parable. "A man planted a vineyard, and rented it out to some farmers, and went into another country for a long time. 20:10At the proper season, he sent a servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard. But the farmers beat him, and sent him away empty. 20:11He sent yet another servant, and they also beat him, and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty. 20:12He sent yet a third, and they also wounded him, and threw him out. 20:13The lord of the vineyard said, 'What will I do? I will send my beloved son. It may be that seeing him, they will respect him.'

20:14"But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.' 20:15They threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them? 20:16He will come and destroy these farmers, and will give the vineyard to others."

When they heard it, they said, "May it never be!"

20:17But he looked at them, and said, "Then what is this that is written,

 'The stone which the builders rejected,
      The same was made the chief cornerstone?'

20:18"Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but it will crush whoever it falls on to dust."

20:19The chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on Him that very hour, but they feared the people -- for they knew He had spoken this parable against them. 20:20They watched him, and sent out spies, who pretended to be righteous, that they might trap him in something he said, so as to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority of the governor. 20:21They asked him, "Teacher, we know that you say and teach what is right, and aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God. 20:22Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"

20:23But he perceived their slyness, and said to them, "Why do you test me? 20:24Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription are on it?"

They answered, "Caesar's."

20:25He said to them, "Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

20:26They weren't able to trap him in his words before the people. They marveled at his answer, and were silent. 20:27Some of the Sadducees came to him, those who deny that there is a resurrection. 20:28They asked him, "Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man's brother dies having a wife, and he is childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up children for his brother. 20:29There were therefore seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died childless. 20:30The second took her as wife, and he died childless. 20:31The third took her, and likewise the seven all left no children, and died. 20:32Afterward the woman also died. 20:33Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them will she be? For the seven had her as a wife."

20:34Jesus said to them, "The sons of this age marry, and are given in marriage. 20:35But those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage. 20:36For neither can they die any more, for they are like the angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. 20:37But that the dead are raised, even Moses shown at the bush, when he called the Lord 'The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' 20:38Now he is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for all are alive to him."

20:39Some of the scribes answered, "Teacher, you speak well." 20:40They didn't dare to ask him any more questions.

20:41He said to them, "Why do they say that the Christ is David's son? 20:42David himself says in the book of Psalms,

 'The Lord said to my Lord,
      "Sit at my right hand,
      20:43Until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet."'

20:44"David therefore calls him Lord, so how is he his son?" 20:45In the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples, 20:46"Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces, the best seats in the synagogues, and the best places at feasts; 20:47who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers: these will receive greater condemnation."

21:1He looked up, and saw the rich people who were putting their gifts into the treasury. 21:2He saw a certain poor widow casting in two lepta. 21:3He said, "Truly I tell you, this poor widow put in more than all of them, 21:4for all these put in gifts for God from their abundance, but she, out of her lack, put in all that she had to live on."

21:5As some were talking about the temple and how it was decorated with beautiful stones and gifts, he said, 21:6"As for these things which you see, the days will come, in which there will not be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down."

21:7They asked him, "Teacher, when therefore will these things be? What is the sign that these things are about to happen?"

21:8He said, "Watch out that you don't get led astray, for many will come in my name, saying, 'I AM,' and, 'The time is at hand.' Therefore don't follow them. 21:9When you hear of wars and disturbances, don't be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end won't come immediately."

21:10Then he said to them, "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. 21:11There will be great earthquakes, famines, and plagues in various places. There will be terrors and great signs from heaven. 21:12But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for my name's sake. 21:13It will turn out as a testimony to you. 21:14Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate beforehand how to answer, 21:15for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or to contradict. 21:16But you will be handed over even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends. Some of you they will cause to be put to death. 21:17You will be hated by all men for my name's sake. 21:18Not a hair of your head will perish.

21:19By your endurance you will win your lives.

21:20"But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation is at hand. 21:21Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. Let them who are in the midst of her depart. Don't let those who are in the country enter therein. 21:22For these are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled. 21:23Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land, and wrath to this people. 21:24They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. 21:25There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and on the earth anxiety of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the sea and the waves; 21:26men fainting for fear, and for expectation of the things which are coming on the world: for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. 21:27Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. 21:28But when these things begin to happen, look up, and lift up your heads, because your redemption is near."

21:29He told them a parable. "See the fig tree, and all the trees. 21:30When they are already budding, you see it and know by your own selves that the summer is already near. 21:31Even so you also, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near. 21:32Most assuredly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all things are accomplished. 21:33Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.

21:34"So be careful, or your hearts will be loaded down with carousing, drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day will come on you suddenly. 21:35For it will come like a snare on all those who dwell on the surface of all the earth. 21:36Therefore be watchful all the time, asking that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things that will happen, and to stand before the Son of Man."

21:37Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every night he went out, and spent the night on the mountain that is called Olivet. 21:38All the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, to hear him.

22:1Now the feast of unleavened bread drew near, which is called the Passover. 22:2The chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put him to death, for they feared the people. 22:3Satan entered into Judas, who was called Iscariot, being numbered with the twelve. 22:4He went away, and talked with the chief priests and captains about how he might deliver him to them. 22:5They were glad, and agreed to give him money. 22:6He consented, and sought an opportunity to deliver him to them in the absence of the multitude. 22:7The day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover must be sacrificed. 22:8He sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat."

22:9They said to him, "Where do you want us to prepare?"

22:10He said to them, "Behold, when you have entered into the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him into the house which he enters. 22:11Tell the master of the house, 'The Teacher says to you, "Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?"' 22:12He will show you a large, furnished upper room. Make preparations there."

22:13They went, found things as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover. 22:14When the hour had come, he sat down with the twelve apostles. 22:15He said to them, "I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, 22:16for I tell you, I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God." 22:17He received a cup, and when he had given thanks, he said, "Take this, and share it among yourselves, 22:18for I tell you, I will not drink at all again from the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God comes." 22:19He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave to them, saying, "This is my body which is given for you. Do this in memory of me." 22:20He took the cup in like manner after supper, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, that which is poured out for you. 22:21But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table. 22:22The Son of Man indeed goes, as it has been determined, but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!"

22:23They began to question among themselves, which of them it was that would do this thing. 22:24There arose also a contention among them, which of them was considered to be greatest. 22:25He said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those who have authority over them are called 'benefactors.' 22:26But not so with you. But one who is the greater among you, let him become as the younger, and one who is governing, as one who serves. 22:27For who is greater, one who sits at the table, or one who serves? Isn't it he who sits at the table? But I am in the midst of you as one who serves. 22:28But you are those who have continued with me in my temptations. 22:29I appoint to you a kingdom, even as my Father appointed to me, 22:30that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom. You will sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."

22:31The Lord said, "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat, 22:32but I prayed for you, that your faith wouldn't fail. You, when once you have turned again, establish your brothers."

22:33He said to him, "Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!"

22:34He said, "I tell you, Peter, the rooster will by no means crow today, before you deny that you know me three times."

22:35He said to them, "When I sent you out without purse, and wallet, and shoes, did you lack anything?"

They said, "Nothing."

22:36Then he said to them, "But now, whoever has a purse, let him take it, and likewise a wallet. Whoever has none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword. 22:37For I tell you that this which is written must still be fulfilled in me: 'He was counted with the lawless.' For that which concerns me has an end."

22:38They said, "Lord, behold, here are two swords."

He said to them, "That is enough."

22:39He came out, and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of Olives. His disciples also followed him. 22:40When he was at the place, he said to them, "Pray that you don't enter into temptation."

22:41He was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and he knelt down and prayed, 22:42saying, "Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done." 22:43An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him. 22:44Being in agony he prayed more earnestly. His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground. 22:45When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the disciples, and found them sleeping because of grief, 22:46and said to them, "Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation."

22:47While he was still speaking, behold, a multitude, and he who was called Judas, one of the twelve, went in front of them. He came near to Jesus to kiss him. 22:48But Jesus said to him, "Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?"

22:49When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said to him, "Lord, shall we strike with the sword?" 22:50A certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.

22:51But Jesus answered, "Let me at least do this" -- and he touched his ear, and healed him. 22:52Jesus said to the chief priests, captains of the temple, and elders, who had come against him, "Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs? 22:53When I was with you in the temple daily, you didn't stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness."

22:54They seized him, and led him away, and brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed from a distance. 22:55When they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and had sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of them. 22:56A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light, and looking intently at him, said, "This man also was with him."

22:57He denied Jesus, saying, "Woman, I don't know him."

22:58After a little while someone else saw him, and said, "You also are one of them!" But Peter answered, "Man, I am not!"

22:59After about one hour passed, another confidently affirmed, saying, "Truly this man also was with him, for he is a Galilean!" 22:60But Peter said, "Man, I don't know what you are talking about!" Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed. 22:61The Lord turned, and looked at Peter. Peter remembered the Lord's word, how he said to him, "Before the rooster crows you will deny me three times." 22:62He went out, and wept bitterly.

22:63The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him. 22:64Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face and asked him, "Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?" 22:65They spoke many other things against him, insulting him.

22:66As soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the people was gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him away into their council, saying, 22:67"If you are the Christ, tell us."

But he said to them, "If I tell you, you won't believe, 22:68and if I ask, you will in no way answer me or let me go. 22:69From now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God."

22:70They all said, "Are you then the Son of God?"

He said to them, "You say it, because I AM."

22:71They said, "Why do we need any more witness? For we ourselves have heard from his own mouth!"

23:1The whole company of them rose up and brought him before Pilate. 23:2They began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man perverting the nation, forbidding paying taxes to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king."

23:3Pilate asked him, "Are you the King of the Jews?"

He answered him, "So you say."

23:4Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, "I find no basis for a charge against this man."

23:5But they insisted, saying, "He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this place." 23:6But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the man was a Galilean. 23:7When he found out that he was in Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.

23:8Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he had wanted to see him for a long time, because he had heard many things about him. He hoped to see some miracle done by him. 23:9He questioned him with many words, but he gave no answers. 23:10The chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing him. 23:11Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him. Dressing him in luxurious clothing, they sent him back to Pilate. 23:12Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day, for before that they were enemies with each other.

23:13Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people, 23:14and said to them, "You brought this man to me as one that perverts the people, and see, I have examined him before you, and found no basis for a charge against this man concerning those things of which you accuse him. 23:15Neither has Herod, for I sent you to him, and see, nothing worthy of death has been done by him. 23:16I will therefore chastise him and release him."

23:17Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the feast. 23:18But they all cried out together, saying, "Away with this man! Release to us Barabbas!" -- 23:19one who was thrown into prison for a certain revolt in the city, and for murder.

23:20Then Pilate spoke to them again, desiring to release Jesus, 23:21but they shouted, saying, "Crucify! Crucify him!"

23:22He said to them the third time, "Why? What evil has this man done? I have found no capital crime in him. I will therefore chastise him and release him." 23:23But they were urgent with loud voices, asking that he might be crucified. Their voices and the voices of the chief priests prevailed. 23:24Pilate adjudged that what they asked for should be done. 23:25He released him who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, for whom they asked, but he delivered Jesus up to their will.

23:26When they led him away, they grabbed one Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him the cross, to carry it after Jesus. 23:27A great multitude of the people followed him, including women who also mourned and lamented him. 23:28But Jesus, turning to them, said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. 23:29For behold, the days are coming in which they will say, 'Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.' 23:30Then will they begin to tell the mountains, 'Fall on us!' and to the hills, 'Cover us.' 23:31For if they do these things in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?"

23:32There were also others, two criminals, led with him to be put to death. 23:33When they came to the place that is called The Skull, they crucified him there with the criminals, one on the right and the other on the left.

23:34Jesus said, "Father, forgive them, for they don't know what they are doing."

Dividing his garments among them, they cast lots. 23:35The people stood watching. The rulers with them also scoffed at him, saying, "He saved others. Let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God, his chosen one!" 23:36The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him vinegar, 23:37and saying, "If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself!" 23:38An inscription was also written over him in letters of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: "THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS."

23:39One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him, saying, "If you are the Christ, save yourself and us!"

23:40But the other answered, and rebuking him said, "Don't you even fear God, seeing you are in the same condemnation? 23:41And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward for our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong." 23:42He said to Jesus, "Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom."

23:43Jesus said to him, "Assuredly I tell you, today you will be with me in Paradise."

23:44It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour. 23:45The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn in two. 23:46Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, "Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!" Having said this, he breathed his last.

23:47When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, "Certainly this was a righteous man." 23:48All the multitudes that came together to see this, when they saw the things that were done, returned beating their breasts. 23:49All his acquaintances, and the women who followed with him from Galilee, stood far away, watching these things.

23:50Behold, a man named Joseph, who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man 23:51(he had not consented to their counsel and deed), from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was also waiting for the kingdom of God: 23:52this man went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body. 23:53He took it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone, where no man had ever yet lain. 23:54It was the day of the Preparation, and the Sabbath was coming on. 23:55The women, who had come with him out of Galilee, followed after, and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid. 23:56They returned, and prepared spices and ointments. On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.

24:1But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they and some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared. 24:2They found the stone rolled away from the tomb. 24:3They entered in, and didn't find the Lord Jesus' body. 24:4It happened, while they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling clothing. 24:5Becoming terrified, they bowed their faces down to the earth.

They said to them, "Why do you seek the living among the dead? 24:6He isn't here, but is risen. Remember what he told you when he was still in Galilee, 24:7saying that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again?"

24:8They remembered his words, 24:9returned from the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest. 24:10Now they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James. The other women with them told these things to the apostles. 24:11These words seemed to them to be nonsense, and they didn't believe them. 24:12But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. Stooping and looking in, he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he departed to his home, wondering what had happened.

24:13Behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named Emmaus, which was sixty stadia from Jerusalem. 24:14They talked with each other about all of these things which had happened. 24:15It happened, while they talked and questioned together, that Jesus himself came near, and went with them. 24:16But their eyes were kept from recognizing him. 24:17He said to them, "What are you talking about as you walk, and are sad?"

24:18One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, "Are you the only stranger in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things which have happened there in these days?"

24:19He said to them, "What things?"

They said to him, "The things concerning Jesus, the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people; 24:20and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him. 24:21But we were hoping that it was he who would redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things happened. 24:22Also, certain women of our company amazed us, having arrived early at the tomb; 24:23and when they didn't find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive. 24:24Some of us went to the tomb, and found it just like the women had said, but they didn't see him."

24:25He said to them, "Foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! 24:26Didn't the Christ have to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?" 24:27Beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. 24:28They drew near to the village, where they were going, and he acted like he would go further.

24:29They urged him, saying, "Stay with us, for it is almost evening, and the day is almost over."

He went in to stay with them. 24:30It happened, when he had sat down at the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks. Breaking it, he gave to them. 24:31Their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he vanished out of their sight. 24:32They said one to another, "Weren't our hearts burning within us, while he spoke to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to us?" 24:33They rose up that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and those who were with them, 24:34saying, "The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon!" 24:35They related the things that happened along the way, and how he was recognized by them in the breaking of the bread.

24:36As they said these things, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and said to them, "Peace be to you."

24:37But they were terrified and filled with fear, and supposed that they saw a spirit.

24:38He said to them, "Why are you troubled? Why do doubts arise in your hearts? 24:39See my hands and my feet, that it is truly me. Touch me and see, for a spirit doesn't have flesh and bones, as you see that I have." 24:40When he had said this, he shown them his hands and his feet. 24:41While they still didn't believe for joy, and wondered, he said to them, "Do you have anything here to eat?"

24:42They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some honeycomb. 24:43He took it, and ate in front of them. 24:44He said to them, "This is what I told you, while I was still with you, that all things which are written in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms, concerning me must be fulfilled." 24:45Then he opened their minds, that they might understand the Scriptures. 24:46He said to them, "Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day, 24:47and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 24:48You are witnesses of these things. 24:49Behold, I send forth the promise of my Father on you. But wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high."

24:50He led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. 24:51It happened, while he blessed them, that he withdrew from them, and was carried up into heaven. 24:52They worshiped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, 24:53and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.

Notes:

[1] back to 2:26 "Christ" (Greek) and "Messiah" (Hebrew) both mean "Anointed One"

[2] back to 9:31 Literally, "exodus"

[3] back to 10:15 Hades is the lower realm of the dead.

[4] back to 12:5 or, Hell

[5] back to 12:6 An assarion was a small copper coin worth about an hour's wages for an agricultural laborer.

[6] back to 12:59 Literally, lepton. A lepton is a very small brass Jewish coin worth half a Roman quadrans each, which is worth a quarter of the copper assarion. Lepta are worth less than 1% of an agricultural worker's daily wages.

[7] back to 13:21 3 sata is about 39 litres or a bit more than a bushel

[8] back to 15:8 A drachma coin was worth about 2 days wages for an agricultural laborer.

[9] back to 16:6 100 batos is about 395 litres, 104 U. S. gallons, or 87 imperial gallons.

[10] back to 16:7 100 cors = about 3,910 litres, 1,030 U. S. gallons, or 860 imperial gallons.

[11] back to 17:36 Some Greek manuscripts add: "Two will be in the field, the one taken, and the other left."

[12] back to 19:13 10 minas was more than 3 year's wages for an agricultural laborer.

[13] back to 21:2 2 lepta was about 1% of a day's wages for an agricultural laborer.

[14] back to 23:44 Time was counted from sunrise, so the sixth hour was about noon.

[15] back to 24:13 60 stadia = about 11 kilometers or about 7 miles.




The Gospel According to John

1:1In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 1:2The same was in the beginning with God. 1:3All things were made through him. Without him was not anything made that has been made. 1:4In him was life, and the life was the light of men. 1:5The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness hasn't overcome it. 1:6There came a man, sent from God, whose name was John. 1:7The same came as a witness, that he might testify about the light, that all might believe through him. 1:8He was not the light, but was sent that he might testify about the light. 1:9The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into the world.

1:10He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world didn't recognize him. 1:11He came to his own, and those who were his own didn't receive him. 1:12But as many as received him, to them he gave the right to become God's children, to those who believe in his name: 1:13who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. 1:14The Word became flesh, and lived among us. We saw his glory, such glory as of the only Son of the Father, full of grace and truth. 1:15John testified about him. He cried out, saying, "This was he of whom I said, 'He who comes after me has surpassed me, for he was before me.'" 1:16From his fullness we all received grace upon grace. 1:17For the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. 1:18No one has seen God at any time. The one and only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. 1:19This is John's testimony, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, "Who are you?"

1:20He confessed, and didn't deny, but he confessed, "I am not the Christ."

1:21They asked him, "What then? Are you Elijah?"

He said, "I am not."

"Are you the prophet?"

He answered, "No."

1:22They said therefore to him, "Who are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?"

1:23He said, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make straight the way of the Lord,' as Isaiah the prophet said."

1:24The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees. 1:25They asked him, "Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?"

1:26John answered them, "I baptize in water, but among you stands one whom you don't know, 1:27he who comes after me, whose sandal strap I'm not worthy to untie." 1:28These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

1:29On the next day, he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, "Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! 1:30This is he of whom I said, 'After me comes a man who is preferred before me, for he was before me.' 1:31I didn't know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water: that he would be revealed to Israel." 1:32John testified, saying, "I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained on him. 1:33I didn't recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in water, he said to me, 'On whoever you will see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.' 1:34I have seen, and have testified that this is the Son of God."

1:35Again, on the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples, 1:36and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and said, "Behold, the Lamb of God!" 1:37The two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. 1:38Jesus turned, and saw them following, and said to them, "What are you looking for?"

They said to him, "Rabbi" (which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), "where are you staying?"

1:39He said to them, "Come, and see."

They came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It was about the tenth hour. 1:40One of the two who heard John, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. 1:41He first found his own brother, Simon, and said to him, "We have found the Messiah!" (which is, being interpreted, Christ). 1:42He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him, and said, "You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas" (which is by interpretation, Peter). 1:43On the next day, he was determined to go forth into Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, "Follow me." 1:44Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter. 1:45Philip found Nathanael, and said to him, "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, wrote: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."

1:46Nathanael said to him, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?"

Philip said to him, "Come and see."

1:47Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said about him, "Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!"

1:48Nathanael said to him, "How do you know me?"

Jesus answered him, "Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you."

1:49Nathanael answered him, "Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are King of Israel!"

1:50Jesus answered him, "Because I told you, 'I saw you underneath the fig tree,' do you believe? You will see greater things than these!" 1:51He said to him, "Most assuredly, I tell you, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man."

2:1The third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. Jesus' mother was there. 2:2Jesus also was invited, with his disciples, to the marriage. 2:3When the wine ran out, Jesus' Mother said to him, "They have no wine."

2:4Jesus said to her, "Woman, what does that have to do with you and me? My hour has not yet come."

2:5His mother said to the servants, "Whatever he says to you, do it." 2:6Now there were six water pots of stone set there after the Jews' manner of purifying, containing two or three metretes apiece. 2:7Jesus said to them, "Fill the water pots with water." They filled them up to the brim. 2:8He said to them, "Now draw some out, and take it to the ruler of the feast." They took it. 2:9When the ruler of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and didn't know where it came from (but the servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called the bridegroom, 2:10and said to him, "Everyone serves the good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!" 2:11This beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.

2:12After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and there they stayed not many days. 2:13The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2:14He found in the temple those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting. 2:15He made a whip of cords, and threw all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the changers' money, and overthrew their tables. 2:16To those who sold the doves, he said, "Take these things out of here! Don't make my Father's house a marketplace!" 2:17His disciples remembered that it was written, "Zeal for your house will eat me up."

2:18The Jews therefore answered him, "What sign do you show to us, seeing that you do these things?"

2:19Jesus answered them, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up."

2:20The Jews therefore said, "Forty-six years was this temple in building, and will you raise it up in three days?" 2:21But he spoke of the temple of his body. 2:22When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

2:23Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name, observing his signs which he did. 2:24But Jesus didn't trust himself to them, because he knew all people, 2:25and because he didn't need for anyone to testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.

3:1Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 3:2The same came to him by night, and said to him, "Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him."

3:3Jesus answered him, "Most assuredly, I tell you, unless one is born anew, he can't see the kingdom of God."

3:4Nicodemus said to him, "How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born?"

3:5Jesus answered, "Most assuredly I tell you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he can't enter into the kingdom of God! 3:6That which is born of the flesh is flesh. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit. 3:7Don't marvel that I said to you, 'You must be born anew.' 3:8The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but don't know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit."

3:9Nicodemus answered him, "How can these things be?"

3:10Jesus answered him, "Are you the teacher of Israel, and don't understand these things? 3:11Most assuredly I tell you, we speak that which we know, and testify of that which we have seen, and you don't receive our witness. 3:12If I told you earthly things and you don't believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things? 3:13No one has ascended into heaven, but he who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven. 3:14As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 3:15that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. 3:16For God so loved the world, that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. 3:17For God didn't send his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through him. 3:18He who believes in him is not judged. He who doesn't believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name of the only born Son of God. 3:19This is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil. 3:20For everyone who does evil hates the light, and doesn't come to the light, for fear that his works would be reproved. 3:21But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his works may be revealed, that they have been done with God."

3:22After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea. He stayed there with them, and baptized. 3:23John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there. They came, and were baptized. 3:24For John was not yet thrown into prison. 3:25There arose therefore a questioning on the part of John's disciples with some Jews about purification. 3:26They came to John, and said to him, "Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have testified, behold, the same baptizes, and all men come to him."

3:27John answered, "A man can receive nothing, unless it has been given him from heaven. 3:28You yourselves testify about me, that I said, 'I am not the Christ,' but, 'I have been sent before him.' 3:29He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This, my joy, therefore is made full. 3:30He must increase, but I must decrease. 3:31He who comes from above is above all. He who is from the Earth belongs to the Earth, and speaks of the Earth. He who comes from heaven is above all. 3:32What he has seen and heard, of that he testifies; and no one receives his witness. 3:33He who has received his witness has set his seal to this, that God is true. 3:34For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God gives the Spirit without measure. 3:35The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. 3:36He who believes in the Son has eternal life, but he who disobeys the Son won't see life, but the wrath of God remains on him."

4:1Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 4:2(although Jesus himself didn't baptize, but his disciples), 4:3he left Judea, and departed again into Galilee. 4:4He needed to pass through Samaria. 4:5So he came to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son, Joseph. 4:6Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about the sixth hour. 4:7A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, "Give me a drink." 4:8For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food.

4:9The Samaritan woman therefore said to him, "How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?" (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)

4:10Jesus answered her, "If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water."

4:11The woman said to him, "Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. From where then have you that living water? 4:12Are you greater than our father, Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, as did his sons, and his cattle?"

4:13Jesus answered her, "Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again, 4:14but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst; but the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life."

4:15The woman said to him, "Sir, give me this water, so that I don't get thirsty, neither come all the way here to draw."

4:16Jesus said to her, "Go, call your husband, and come here."

4:17The woman answered, "I have no husband."

Jesus said to her, "You said well, 'I have no husband,' 4:18for you have had five husbands; and he whom you now have is not your husband. This you have said truly."

4:19The woman said to him, "Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet. 4:20Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship."

4:21Jesus said to her, "Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, will you worship the Father. 4:22You worship that which you don't know. We worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews. 4:23But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to be his worshippers. 4:24God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth."

4:25The woman said to him, "I know that Messiah comes," (he who is called Christ). "When he has come, he will declare to us all things."

4:26Jesus said to her, "I who speak to you am he." 4:27At this, his disciples came. They marveled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no one said, "What are you looking for?" or, "Why do you speak with her?" 4:28So the woman left her water pot, and went away into the city, and said to the people, 4:29"Come, see a man who told me everything that I did. Can this be the Christ?"

4:30They went out of the city, and were coming to him. 4:31In the meanwhile, the disciples urged him, saying, "Rabbi, eat."

4:32But he said to them, "I have food to eat that you don't know about."

4:33The disciples therefore said one to another, "Has anyone brought him something to eat?"

4:34Jesus said to them, "My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work. 4:35Don't you say, 'There are yet four months until the harvest?' Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and look at the fields, that they are white already to harvest. 4:36He who reaps receives wages, and gathers fruit to eternal life; that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together. 4:37For in this the saying is true, 'One sows, and another reaps.' 4:38I sent you to reap that for which you haven't labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor."

4:39From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, 'He told me everything that I did." 4:40So when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days. 4:41Many more believed because of his word. 4:42They said to the woman, "Now we believe, not because of your speaking; for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world."

4:43After the two days he went forth from there and went into Galilee. 4:44For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country. 4:45So when he came into Galilee, the Galilaeans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast. 4:46He came therefore again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum. 4:47When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him, and begged him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. 4:48Jesus therefore said to him, "Unless you see signs and wonders, you will in no way believe."

4:49The nobleman said to him, "Sir, come down before my child dies." 4:50Jesus said to him, "Go your way. Your son lives." The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way. 4:51As he was now going down, his servants met him and reported, saying "Your child lives!" 4:52So he inquired of them the hour when he began to get better. They said therefore to him, "Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him." 4:53So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, "Your son lives." He believed, as did his whole house. 4:54This is again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.

5:1After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 5:2Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, there is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, "Bethesda," having five porches. 5:3In these lay a great multitude of those who were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the water; 5:4for an angel of the Lord went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was made whole of whatever disease he was afflicted with. 5:5A certain man was there, who had been sick for thirty-eight years. 5:6When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, "Do you want to be made well?"

5:7The sick man answered him, "Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I'm coming, another steps down before me."

5:8Jesus said to him, "Arise, take up your mat, and walk."

5:9Immediately, the man was made well, and took up his mat and walked.

Now it was the Sabbath on that day. 5:10So the Jews said to him who was cured, "It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the mat."

5:11He answered them, "He who made me well, the same said to me, 'Take up your mat, and walk.'"

5:12Then they asked him, "Who is the man who said to you, 'Take up your mat, and walk'?"

5:13But he who was healed didn't know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place.

5:14Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said to him, "Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that nothing worse happens to you."

5:15The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well. 5:16For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought to kill him, because he did these things on the Sabbath. 5:17But Jesus answered them, "My Father is still working, so I am working, too." 5:18For this cause therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also called God his own Father, making himself equal with God. 5:19Jesus therefore answered them, "Most assuredly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things he does, these the Son also does likewise. 5:20For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does. He will show him greater works than these, that you may marvel. 5:21For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires. 5:22For neither does the Father judge any man, but he has given all judgment to the Son, 5:23that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He who doesn't honor the Son doesn't honor the Father who sent him.

5:24"Most assuredly I tell you, he who hears my word, and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and doesn't come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life. 5:25Most assuredly, I tell you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the Son of God's voice; and those who hear will live. 5:26For as the Father has life in himself, even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself. 5:27He also gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man. 5:28Don't marvel at this, for the hour comes, in which all that are in the tombs will hear his voice, 5:29and will come forth; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment. 5:30I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous; because I don't seek my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.

5:31"If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid. 5:32It is another who testifies about me. I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true. 5:33You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth. 5:34But the testimony which I receive is not from man. However, I say these things that you may be saved. 5:35He was the lamp that burns and shines, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. 5:36But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John, for the works which the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me. 5:37The Father himself, who sent me, has testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form. 5:38You don't have his word living in you; for whom he sent, him you don't believe.

5:39"You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and these are they which testify about me. 5:40Yet you will not come to me, that you may have life. 5:41I don't receive glory from men. 5:42But I know you, that you don't have God's love in yourselves. 5:43I have come in my Father's name, and you don't receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him. 5:44How can you believe, who receive glory from one another, and you don't seek the glory that comes from the only God?

5:45"Don't think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have set your hope. 5:46For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote about me. 5:47But if you don't believe his writings, how will you believe my words?"

6:1After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of Tiberias. 6:2A great multitude followed him, because they saw the signs which he did on those who were sick. 6:3Jesus went up into the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples. 6:4Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. 6:5Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great multitude was coming to him, said to Philip, "Where are we to buy bread, that these may eat?" 6:6This he said to test him, for he himself knew what he would do.

6:7Philip answered him, "Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that everyone of them may receive a little."

6:8One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him, 6:9"There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are these among so many?"

6:10Jesus said, "Have the people sit down." Now there was much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 6:11Jesus took the loaves; and having given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down; likewise also of the fish as much as they desired. 6:12When they were filled, he said to his disciples, "Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that nothing be lost." 6:13So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten. 6:14When therefore the people saw the sign which Jesus did, they said, "This is truly the prophet who comes into the world." 6:15Jesus therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force, to make him king, withdrew again into the mountain by himself.

6:16When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 6:17and they entered into the boat, and were going over the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them. 6:18The sea was rising by reason of a great wind that blew. 6:19When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing near to the boat; and they were afraid. 6:20But he said to them, "It is I. Don't be afraid." 6:21They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat. Immediately the boat was at the land where they were going.

6:22On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, except the one which his disciples had entered, and that Jesus hadn't entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples went away alone. 6:23However boats from Tiberias came near to the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 6:24When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus wasn't there, neither his disciples, they themselves got into the boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus. 6:25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they asked him, "Rabbi, when did you come here?"

6:26Jesus answered them, "Most assuredly I tell you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves, and were filled. 6:27Don't work for the food which perishes, but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For the Father, even God, has sealed him."

6:28They said therefore to him, "What must we do, that we may work the works of God?"

6:29Jesus answered them, "This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent."

6:30They said therefore to him, "What then do you do for a sign, that we may see, and believe you? What work do you do? 6:31Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness. As it is written, 'He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.'"

6:32Jesus therefore said to them, "Most assuredly, I tell you, it wasn't Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven. 6:33For the bread of God is that which comes down out of heaven, and gives life to the world."

6:34They said therefore to him, "Lord, always give us this bread."

6:35Jesus said to them. "I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will not be hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty. 6:36But I told you that you have seen me, and yet don't believe. 6:37All those who the Father gives me will come to me. Him who comes to me I will in no way throw out. 6:38For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me. 6:39This is the will of my Father who sent me, that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing, but should raise them up at the last day. 6:40This is the will of the one who sent me, that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day."

6:41The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, "I am the bread which came down out of heaven." 6:42They said, "Isn't this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does he say, 'I have come down out of heaven?'"

6:43Therefore Jesus answered them, "Don't murmur among yourselves. 6:44No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day. 6:45It is written in the prophets, 'They will all be taught by God.' Therefore everyone who hears from the Father, and has learned, comes to me. 6:46Not that any man has seen the Father, except he who is from God. He has seen the Father. 6:47Most assuredly, I tell you, he who believes in me has eternal life. 6:48I am the bread of life. 6:49Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. 6:50This is the bread which comes down out of heaven, that a man may eat of it, and not die. 6:51I am the living bread which came down out of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Yes, the bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world."

6:52The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying, "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"

6:53Jesus therefore said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you don't have life in yourselves. 6:54He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. 6:55For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. 6:56He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives in me, and I in him. 6:57As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father; so he who feeds on me, he will also live because of me. 6:58This is the bread which came down out of heaven -- not as our fathers ate the manna, and died. He who eats this bread will live forever." 6:59These things he said in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

6:60Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this, said, "This is a hard saying! Who can hear it?"

6:61But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said to them, "Does this cause you to stumble? 6:62What if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? 6:63It is the spirit who gives life. The flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are life. 6:64But there are some of you who don't believe." For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who didn't believe, and who it was who would betray him. 6:65He said, "For this cause have I said to you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my Father."

6:66At this, many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him. 6:67Jesus said therefore to the twelve, "You don't also want to go away, do you?"

6:68Simon Peter answered him, "Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life. 6:69We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God."

6:70Jesus answered them, "Didn't I choose you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil?" 6:71Now he spoke of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of the twelve.

7:1After these things, Jesus walked in Galilee, for he would not walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him. 7:2Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Booths, was at hand. 7:3His brothers therefore said to him, "Depart from here, and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do. 7:4For no man does anything in secret, and himself seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world." 7:5For even his brothers didn't believe in him.

7:6Jesus therefore said to them, "My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready. 7:7The world can't hate you, but it hates me, because I testify about it, that its works are evil. 7:8You go up to the feast. I am not yet going up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled."

7:9Having said these things to them, he stayed in Galilee. 7:10But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret. 7:11The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, "Where is he?" 7:12There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him. Some said, "He is a good man." Others said, "Not so, but he leads the multitude astray." 7:13Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews. 7:14But when it was now the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught. 7:15The Jews therefore marveled, saying, "How does this man know letters, having never been educated?"

7:16Jesus therefore answered them, "My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me. 7:17If anyone desires to do his will, he will know of the teaching, whether it is from God, or if I speak from myself. 7:18He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. 7:19Didn't Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill me?"

7:20The multitude answered, "You have a demon! Who seeks to kill you?"

7:21Jesus answered them, "I did one work, and you all marvel because of it. 7:22Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you circumcise a boy. 7:23If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me, because I made a man every bit whole on the Sabbath? 7:24Don't judge according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment."

7:25Some therefore of them of Jerusalem said, "Isn't this he whom they seek to kill? 7:26Behold, he speaks openly, and they say nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly the Christ? 7:27However we know where this man comes from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from."

7:28Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, "You both know me, and know where I am from. I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don't know. 7:29I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me."

7:30They sought therefore to take him. No one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. 7:31But of the multitude, many believed in him. They said, "When the Christ comes, will he do more signs than those which this man has done?" 7:32The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.

7:33Then Jesus said, "Yet a little while, am I with you, then I go to him who sent me. 7:34You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come."

7:35The Jews therefore said among themselves, "Where will this man go that we won't find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks? 7:36What is this word that he said, 'You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come?'"

7:37Now on the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried out, "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink! 7:38He who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, from within him will flow rivers of living water." 7:39But he said this about the Spirit, which those believing in him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus wasn't yet glorified.

7:40Many of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said, "This is truly the prophet." 7:41Others said, "This is the Christ." But some said, "What, does the Christ come out of Galilee? 7:42Hasn't the Scripture said that the Christ comes of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?" 7:43So there arose a division in the multitude because of him. 7:44Some of them would have arrested him, but no one laid hands on him. 7:45The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, "Why didn't you bring him?"

7:46The officers answered, "No man ever spoke like this man!"

7:47The Pharisees therefore answered them, "Are you also led astray? 7:48Have any of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees? 7:49But this multitude that doesn't know the law is accursed."

7:50Nicodemus (he who came to him by night, being one of them) said to them, 7:51"Does our law judge a man, unless it first hears from him personally and knows what he does?"

7:52They answered him, "Are you also from Galilee? Search, and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee."

7:53Everyone went to his own house, 8:1but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 8:2At dawn, he came again into the temple, and all the people came to him. He sat down, and taught them. 8:3The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery. Having set her in the midst, 8:4they told him, "Teacher, we found this woman in adultery, in the very act. 8:5Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone such. What then do you say about her?" 8:6They said this testing him, that they might have something to accuse him of.

But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on the ground with his finger, as if he didn't hear. 8:7But when they continued asking him, he lifted himself up, and said to them, "He who is without sin among you, let him throw the first stone at her." 8:8Again he stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground.

8:9They, when they heard it, being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the oldest, even to the last. Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in the middle. 8:10Jesus lifted himself up, and seeing no one but the woman, said to her, "Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?"

8:11She said, "No one, Lord."

Jesus said, "Neither do I condemn you. Go your way. From now on, sin no more."

8:12Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them, saying, "I am the light of the world. He who follows me will not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life."

8:13The Pharisees therefore said to him, "You testify about yourself. Your testimony is not valid."

8:14Jesus answered them, "Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you don't know where I came from, or where I am going. 8:15You judge according to the flesh. I judge no one. 8:16Even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me. 8:17It's also written in your law that the testimony of two men is valid. 8:18I am he who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me."

8:19They said therefore to him, "Where is your Father?"

Jesus answered, "You know neither me, nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also." 8:20Jesus spoke these words in the treasury, as he taught in the temple. No one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come. 8:21Jesus said therefore again to them, "I am going away, and you will seek me, and will die in your sins. Where I go, you can't come."

8:22The Jews therefore said, "Will he kill himself, that he says, 'Where I am going, you can't come?'"

8:23He said to them, "You are from beneath. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world. 8:24I said therefore to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your sins."

8:25They said therefore to him, "Who are you?"

Jesus said to them, "Just what I have been saying to you from the beginning. 8:26I have many things to speak and to judge concerning you. However he who sent me is true; and the things which I heard from him, these I say to the world."

8:27They didn't perceive that he spoke to them about the Father. 8:28Jesus therefore said to them, "When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things. 8:29He who sent me is with me. The Father hasn't left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him."

8:30As he spoke these things, many believed in him. 8:31Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him, "If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples. 8:32You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free."

8:33They answered him, "We are Abraham's seed, and have never yet been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, 'You will be made free?'"

8:34Jesus answered them, "Most assuredly I tell you, everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin. 8:35A bondservant doesn't live in the house forever. A son remains forever. 8:36If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed. 8:37I know that you are Abraham's seed, yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you. 8:38I say the things which I have seen with my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your father."

8:39They answered him, "Our father is Abraham."

Jesus said to them, "If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham. 8:40But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth, which I heard from God. Abraham didn't do this. 8:41You do the works of your father."

They said to him, "We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father, God."

8:42Therefore Jesus said to them, "If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came forth and have come from God. For neither have I come of myself, but he sent me. 8:43Why don't you understand my speech? Because you can't hear my word. 8:44You are of your Father, the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and doesn't stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. 8:45But because I tell the truth, you don't believe me. 8:46Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me? 8:47He who is of God hears the words of God. For this cause you don't hear, because you are not of God."

8:48Then the Jews answered him, "Don't we say well that you are a Samaritan, and have a demon?"

8:49Jesus answered, "I don't have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me. 8:50But I don't seek my own glory. There is one who seeks and judges. 8:51Most assuredly, I tell you, if a person keeps my word, he will never see death."

8:52Then the Jews said to him, "Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and you say, 'If a man keeps my word, he will never taste of death.' 8:53Are you greater than our father, Abraham, who died? The prophets died. Who do you make yourself out to be?"

8:54Jesus answered, "If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that he is our God. 8:55You have not known him, but I know him. If I said, 'I don't know him,' I would be like you, a liar. But I know him, and keep his word. 8:56Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw it, and was glad."

8:57The Jews therefore said to him, "You are not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?"

8:58Jesus said to them, "Most assuredly, I tell you, before Abraham was born, I AM."

8:59They took up stones therefore to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.

9:1As he passed by, he saw a man blind from his birth. 9:2His disciples asked him, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?"

9:3Jesus answered, "Neither did this man sin, nor his parents. But, that the works of God might be revealed in him, 9:4I must work the works of him who sent me, while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work. 9:5When I am in the world, I am the light of the world." 9:6When he had said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the blind man's eyes with the mud, 9:7and said to him, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam" (which means "Sent"). So he went away, washed, and came seeing. 9:8The neighbors therefore, and those who saw that he was blind before, said, "Isn't this he who sat and begged?" 9:9Others said, "It is he." Still others said, "He is like him."

He said, "I am he." 9:10They said therefore to him, "How were your eyes opened?"

9:11He answered, "A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, "Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash." So I went away and washed, and I received sight."

9:12Then they asked him, "Where is he?"

He said, "I don't know."

9:13They brought him who before was blind to the Pharisees. 9:14It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. 9:15Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. He said to them, "He put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I see."

9:16Some therefore of the Pharisees said, "This man is not from God, because he doesn't keep the Sabbath." Others said, "How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?" There was division among them. 9:17Therefore they asked the blind man again, "What do you say about him, in that he opened your eyes?"

He said, "He is a prophet."

9:18The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him who had received his sight, 9:19and asked them, "Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?"

9:20His parents answered them, "We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind; 9:21but how he now sees, we don't know; or who opened his eyes, we don't know. He is of age. Ask him. He will speak for himself." 9:22His parents said these things because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if any man would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue. 9:23Therefore his parents said, "He is of age. Ask him."

9:24So they called the man who was blind a second time, and said to him, "Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner."

9:25He therefore answered, "I don't know if he is a sinner. One thing I know: that though I was blind, now I see."

9:26They said to him again, "What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?"

9:27He answered them, "I told you already, and you didn't listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?"

9:28They became abusive towards him and said, "You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. 9:29We know that God has spoken to Moses. But as for this man, we don't know where he comes from."

9:30The man answered them, "How amazing! You don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes. 9:31We know that God doesn't listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshipper of God, and does his will, he listens to him. 9:32Since the world began it has never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind. 9:33If this man were not from God, he could do nothing."

9:34They answered him, "You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?" They threw him out.

9:35Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, "Do you believe in the Son of God?"

9:36He answered, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?"

9:37Jesus said to him, "You have both seen him, and it is he who speaks with you."

9:38He said, "Lord, I believe!" and he worshiped him.

9:39Jesus said, "I came into this world for judgment, that those who don't see may see; and that those who see may become blind."

9:40Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said to him, "Are we also blind?"

9:41Jesus said to them, "If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now you say, 'We see.' Therefore your sin remains.

10:1"Most assuredly, I tell you, he who doesn't enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. 10:2But he who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 10:3The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out. 10:4Whenever he brings out his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. 10:5They will by no means follow a stranger, but will flee from him; for they don't know the voice of strangers." 10:6Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they didn't understand what he was telling them.

10:7Jesus therefore said to them again, "Most assuredly, I tell you, I am the sheep's door. 10:8All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep didn't listen to them. 10:9I am the door. If anyone enters in by me, he will be saved, and will go in and go out, and will find pasture. 10:10The thief only comes to steal, kill, and destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly. 10:11I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 10:12He who is a hired hand, and not a shepherd, who doesn't own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep, and scatters them. 10:13The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand, and doesn't care for the sheep. 10:14I am the good shepherd. I know my own, and I'm known by my own; 10:15even as the Father knows me, and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep. 10:16I have other sheep, which are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will hear my voice. They will become one flock with one shepherd. 10:17Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. 10:18No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father."

10:19Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because of these words. 10:20Many of them said, "He has a demon, and is mad! Why do you listen to him?" 10:21Others said, "These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. It isn't possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind, is it?"

10:22It was the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem. 10:23It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's porch. 10:24The Jews therefore came around him and said to him, "How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly."

10:25Jesus answered them, "I told you, and you don't believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about me. 10:26But you don't believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I told you. 10:27My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. 10:28I give eternal life to them. They will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand. 10:29My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all. No one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand. 10:30I and the Father are one."

10:31Therefore Jews took up stones again to stone him. 10:32Jesus answered them, "I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?"

10:33The Jews answered him, "We don't stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy: because you, being a man, make yourself God."

10:34Jesus answered them, "Isn't it written in your law, 'I said, you are gods?' 10:35If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture can't be broken), 10:36Do you say of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, 'You blaspheme,' because I said, 'I am the Son of God?' 10:37If I don't do the works of my Father, don't believe me. 10:38But if I do them, though you don't believe me, believe the works; that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father."

10:39They sought again to seize him, and he went forth out of their hand. 10:40He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was at the first baptizing, and there he stayed. 10:41Many came to him. They said, "John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is true." 10:42Many believed in him there.

11:1Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister, Martha. 11:2It was that Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother, Lazarus, was sick. 11:3The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, "Lord, behold, he for whom you have great affection is sick." 11:4But when Jesus heard it, he said, "This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, that God's Son may be glorified by it." 11:5Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 11:6When therefore he heard that he was sick, he stayed at that time two days in the place where he was. 11:7Then after this he said to the disciples, "Let's go into Judea again."

11:8The disciples told him, "Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and are you going there again?"

11:9Jesus answered, "Aren't there twelve hours of daylight? If a man walks in the day, he doesn't stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 11:10But if a man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light isn't in him." 11:11He said these things, and after that, he said to them, "Our friend, Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep."

11:12The disciples therefore said to him, "Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover."

11:13Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep. 11:14So Jesus said to them plainly then, "Lazarus is dead. 11:15I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let's go to him."

11:16Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, "Let's go also, that we may die with him."

11:17So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the tomb four days already. 11:18Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia away. 11:19Many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary, to console them concerning their brother. 11:20Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house. 11:21Therefore Martha said to Jesus, "Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died. 11:22Even now I know that, whatever you ask of God, God will give you." 11:23Jesus said to her, "Your brother will rise again."

11:24Martha said to him, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day."

11:25Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me, though he die, yet will he live. 11:26Whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?"

11:27She said to him, "Yes, Lord. I have come to believe that you are the Christ, God's Son, he who comes into the world."

11:28When she had said this, she went away, and called Mary, her sister, secretly, saying, "The Teacher is here, and is calling you."

11:29She, when she heard this, arose quickly, and went to him. 11:30Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha met him. 11:31Then the Jews who were with her in the house, and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying, "She is going to the tomb to weep there." 11:32Mary therefore, when she came to where Jesus was, and saw him, fell down at his feet, saying to him, "Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died."

11:33When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, 11:34and said, "Where have you laid him?"

They told him, "Lord, come and see."

11:35Jesus wept.

11:36The Jews therefore said, "See how much affection he had for him!" 11:37Some of them said, "Couldn't this man, who opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also caused that this man wouldn't die?"

11:38Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it. 11:39Jesus said, "Take away the stone."

Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, "Lord, by this time there is a stench, for he has been dead four days."

11:40Jesus said to her, "Didn't I tell you that if you believed, you would see God's glory?"

11:41So they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying. Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, "Father, I thank you that you listened to me. 11:42I know that you always listen to me, but because of the multitude that stands around I said this, that they may believe that you sent me." 11:43When he had said this, he cried with a loud voice, "Lazarus, come out!"

11:44He who was dead came out, bound hand and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth.

Jesus said to them, "Free him, and let him go."

11:45Therefore many of the Jews, who came to Mary and saw that which Jesus did, believed in him. 11:46But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and told them the things which Jesus had done. 11:47The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, "What are we doing? For this man does many signs. 11:48If we leave him alone like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation."

11:49But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, "You know nothing at all, 11:50nor do you take account that it is advantageous for us that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation not perish." 11:51Now he didn't say this of himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation, 11:52and not for the nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad. 11:53So from that day forth they took counsel that they might put him to death. 11:54Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but departed from there into the country near the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim. He stayed there with his disciples.

11:55Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand. Many went up to Jerusalem out of the country before the Passover, to purify themselves. 11:56Then they sought for Jesus and spoke one with another, as they stood in the temple, "What do you think? Isn't he coming to the feast?" 11:57Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should report it, that they might seize him.

12:1Therefore six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised from the dead. 12:2So they made him a supper there. Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him. 12:3Mary, therefore, took a pound of ointment of pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment. 12:4Then Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, one of his disciples, who would betray him, said, 12:5"Why wasn't this ointment sold for three hundred denarii, and given to the poor?" 12:6Now he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used to steal what was put into it. 12:7But Jesus said, "Leave her alone. She has kept this for the day of my burial. 12:8For you always have the poor with you, but you don't always have me."

12:9A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there, and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. 12:10But the chief priests conspired to also put Lazarus to death, 12:11because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus.

12:12On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast. When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 12:13they took the branches of the palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried out, "Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!"

12:14Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it. As it is written, 12:15"Don't be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, your King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt." 12:16His disciples didn't understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him, and that they had done these things to him. 12:17The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, was testifying. 12:18For this cause also the multitude went and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign. 12:19The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, "See how you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him."

12:20Now there were certain Greeks among those that went up to worship at the feast. 12:21These, therefore, came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, "Sir, we want to see Jesus." 12:22Philip came and told Andrew, and in turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus. 12:23Jesus answered them, "The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. 12:24Most assuredly I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit. 12:25He who loves his life will lose it. He who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life. 12:26If anyone serves me, let him follow me. Where I am, there will my servant also be. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

12:27"Now my soul is troubled. What shall I say? 'Father, save me from this time?' But for this cause I came to this time. 12:28Father, glorify your name!"

Then there came a voice out of the sky, saying, "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again."

12:29The multitude therefore, who stood by and heard it, said that it had thundered. Others said, "An angel has spoken to him."

12:30Jesus answered, "This voice hasn't come for my sake, but for your sakes. 12:31Now is the judgment of this world. Now the prince of this world will be cast out. 12:32I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself." 12:33But he said this, signifying by what kind of death he should die. 12:34The multitude answered him, "We have heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever. How do you say, 'The Son of Man must be lifted up?' Who is this Son of Man?"

12:35Jesus therefore said to them, "Yet a little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness doesn't overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn't know where he is going. 12:36While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light." Jesus said these things, and he departed and hid himself from them. 12:37But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they didn't believe in him, 12:38that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke,

 "Lord, who has believed our report?
      To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?"

12:39For this cause they couldn't believe, for Isaiah said again,

 12:40"He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their heart,
      Lest they should see with their eyes,
      And perceive with their heart,
      And would turn,
      And I would heal them."

12:41Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and he spoke of him. 12:42Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn't confess it, so that they wouldn't be put out of the synagogue, 12:43for they loved men's approval more than God's approval.

12:44Jesus cried out and said, "Whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me. 12:45He who sees me sees him who sent me. 12:46I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness. 12:47If anyone listens to my sayings, and doesn't believe, I don't judge him. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. 12:48He who rejects me, and doesn't receive my sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke, the same will judge him in the last day. 12:49For I spoke not from myself, but the Father who sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. 12:50I know that his commandment is eternal life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to me, so I speak."

13:1Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus knowing that his time had come that he would depart out of this world to his Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 13:2After supper, the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him, 13:3Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and was going to God, 13:4arose from supper, and laid aside his outer garments. He took a towel, and wrapped a towel around his waist. 13:5Then he poured water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him. 13:6Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him, "Lord, do you wash my feet?"

13:7Jesus answered him, "You don't know what I am doing now, but you will understand later."

13:8Peter said to him, "You will never wash my feet!"

Jesus answered him, "If I don't wash you, you have no part with me."

13:9Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head!"

13:10Jesus said to him, "Someone who has bathed only needs to have their feet washed, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not all of you." 13:11For he knew him who would betray him, therefore he said, "You are not all clean." 13:12So when he had washed their feet, put his outer garment back on, and sat down again, he said to them, "Do you know what I have done to you? 13:13You call me, 'Teacher' and 'Lord.' You say so correctly, for so I am. 13:14If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet. 13:15For I have given you an example, that you also should do as I have done to you. 13:16Most assuredly I tell you, a servant is not greater than his lord, neither one who is sent greater than he who sent him. 13:17If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them. 13:18I don't speak concerning all of you. I know whom I have chosen. But that the Scripture may be fulfilled, 'He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.' 13:19From now on, I tell you before it happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I AM. 13:20Most assuredly I tell you, he who receives whoever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives him who sent me."

13:21When Jesus had said this, he was troubled in the spirit, and testified, "Most assuredly I tell you that one of you will betray me."

13:22The disciples looked at one another, perplexed about whom he spoke. 13:23One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was at the table, leaning against Jesus' breast. 13:24Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, and said to him, "Tell us who it is of whom he speaks."

13:25He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, asked him, "Lord, who is it?"

13:26Jesus therefore answered, "It is he to whom I will give this morsel when I have dipped it." So when he had dipped the morsel, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. 13:27After the morsel, then Satan entered into him.

Jesus therefore said to him, "What you do, do quickly."

13:28Now no man at the table knew why he said this to him. 13:29For some thought, because Judas had the money box, that Jesus said to him, "Buy what things we need for the feast," or that he should give something to the poor. 13:30Therefore, having received that morsel, he went out immediately. It was night.

13:31When he had gone out, Jesus said, "Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him. 13:32If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him immediately. 13:33Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, 'Where I am going, you can't come,' so now I tell you. 13:34A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another, just like I have loved you; that you also love one another. 13:35By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another."

13:36Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, where are you going?"

Jesus answered, "Where I am going, you can't follow now, but you will follow afterwards."

13:37Peter said to him, "Lord, why can't I follow you even now? I will lay down my life for you."

13:38Jesus answered him, "Will you lay down your life for me? Most assuredly I tell you, the rooster won't crow until you have denied me three times.

14:1"Don't let your heart be troubled. Believe in God. Believe also in me. 14:2In my Father's house are many mansions. If it weren't so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place for you. 14:3If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there also. 14:4Where I go, you know, and you know the way."

14:5Thomas says to him, "Lord, we don't know where you are going. How can we know the way?"

14:6Jesus said to him, "I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father, but by me. 14:7If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on, you know him, and have seen him."

14:8Philip said to him, "Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us."

14:9Jesus said to him, "Have I been with you such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. How do you say, 'Show us the Father?' 14:10Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I tell you, I speak not from myself; but the Father living in me does his works. 14:11Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake. 14:12Most assuredly I tell you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, he will do also; and greater works than these will he do; because I am going to my Father. 14:13Whatever you will ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 14:14If you will ask anything in my name, that will I do. 14:15If you love me, keep my commandments. 14:16I will pray to the Father, and he will give you another Counselor, that he may be with you forever, -- 14:17the Spirit of truth, whom the world can't receive; for it doesn't see him, neither knows him. You know him, for he lives with you, and will be in you. 14:18I will not leave you orphans. I will come to you. 14:19Yet a little while, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you will live also. 14:20In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. 14:21Someone who has my commandments, and keeps them, that person is one who loves me. One who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will reveal myself to him."

14:22Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, "Lord, what will happen that you will reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?"

14:23Jesus answered him, "If a man loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our home with him. 14:24He who doesn't love me doesn't keep my words. The word which you hear isn't mine, but the Father's who sent me. 14:25I have said these things to you, while still living with you. 14:26But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and bring to your memory all that I said to you. 14:27Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you; not as the world gives, give I to you. Don't let your heart be troubled, neither let it be fearful. 14:28You heard how I told you, 'I go away, and I come to you.' If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I said 'I am going to my Father;' for the Father is greater than I. 14:29Now I have told you before it happens so that, when it happens, you may believe. 14:30I will no more speak much with you, for the prince of the world comes, and he has nothing in me. 14:31But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do. Arise, let us go from here.

15:1"I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer. 15:2Every branch in me that doesn't bear fruit, he takes away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it may bear more fruit. 15:3You are already pruned clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. 15:4Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch can't bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me. 15:5I am the vine. You are the branches. He who remains in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing. 15:6If a man doesn't remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, throw them into the fire, and they are burned. 15:7If you remain in me, and my words remain in you, you will ask whatever you desire, and it will be done to you.

15:8"In this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit; and so you will be my disciples. 15:9Even as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love. 15:10If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and remain in his love. 15:11I have spoken these things to you, that my joy may be in you, and that your joy may be made full.

15:12"This is my commandment, that you love one another, even as I have loved you. 15:13Greater love has no one than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. 15:14You are my friends, if you do whatever I command you. 15:15No longer do I call you servants, for the servant doesn't know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, for everything that I heard from my Father, I have made known to you. 15:16You didn't choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever you will ask of the Father in my name, he may give it to you.

15:17"I command these things to you, that you may love one another. 15:18If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you. 15:19If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world, since I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. 15:20Remember the word that I said to you: 'A servant is not greater than his lord.' If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also. 15:21But all these things will they do to you for my name's sake, because they don't know him who sent me. 15:22If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. 15:23He who hates me, hates my Father also. 15:24If I hadn't done among them the works which no one else did, they wouldn't have had sin. But now have they seen and also hated both me and my Father. 15:25But that the word may be fulfilled that is written in their law, 'They hated me without a cause.'

15:26"When the Counselor has come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me. 15:27You will also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.

16:1"These things have I spoken to you, so that you wouldn't be caused to stumble. 16:2They will put you out of the synagogues. Yes, the time comes that whoever kills you will think that he offers service to God. 16:3They will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me. 16:4But I have told you these things, so that when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about them. I didn't tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you. 16:5But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?' 16:6But because I have told you these things, sorrow has filled your heart. 16:7Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is to your advantage that I go away, for if I don't go away, the Counselor won't come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. 16:8When he has come, he will convict the world in respect to sin, and righteousness, and judgment; 16:9of sin, because they don't believe in me; 16:10of righteousness, because I am going to my Father, and you see me no more; 16:11of judgment, because the prince of this world has been judged.

16:12"I have yet many things to tell you, but you can't bear them now. 16:13However when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak from himself; but whatever things he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you the things that are to come. 16:14He will glorify me, for he will take from what is mine, and will declare it to you. 16:15All things whatever the Father has are mine; therefore I said that he takes of mine, and will declare it to you. 16:16A little while, and you will not see me. Again a little while, and you will see me."

16:17Some of his disciples therefore said to one another, "What is this that he says to us, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me;' and, 'Because I go to the Father?'" 16:18They said therefore, "What is this that he says, 'A little while?' We don't know what he is saying."

16:19Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them, "Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me?' 16:20Most assuredly I tell you, that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy. 16:21A woman, when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her time has come. But when she has delivered the child, she doesn't remember the anguish any more, for the joy that a child is born into the world. 16:22You therefore now have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.

16:23"In that day you will ask me no question. Most assuredly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you. 16:24Until now, you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full. 16:25I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech. But the time comes when I will no more speak to you in figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father. 16:26In that day you will ask in my name; and I don't say to you, that I will pray to the Father for you, 16:27for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God. 16:28I came out from the Father, and have come into the world. Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father."

16:29His disciples said to him, "Behold, now you speak plainly, and speak no figures of speech. 16:30Now we know that you know all things, and don't need for anyone to question you. By this we believe that you came forth from God."

16:31Jesus answered them, "Do you now believe? 16:32Behold, the time comes, yes, has now come, that you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. 16:33I have told you these things, that in me you may have peace. In the world you have oppression; but cheer up! I have overcome the world."

17:1Jesus said these things, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, "Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may also glorify you; 17:2even as you gave him authority over all flesh, that to all whom you have given him, he will give eternal life. 17:3This is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ. 17:4I glorified you on the earth. I have accomplished the work which you have given me to do. 17:5Now, Father, glorify me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed. 17:6I revealed your name to the people whom you have given me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me. They have kept your word. 17:7Now they know that all things whatever you have given me are from you, 17:8for the words which you have given me I have given to them, and they received them, and knew for sure that I came forth from you, and they believed that you sent me. 17:9I pray for them. I don't pray for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours. 17:10All things that are mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them. 17:11I am no more in the world, and these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them through your name which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are. 17:12While I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name. Those whom you have given me I have kept. None of them is lost, except the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. 17:13But now I come to you, and I say these things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves. 17:14I have given them your word. The world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. 17:15I pray not that you would take them from the world, but that you would keep them from the evil one. 17:16They are not of the world even as I am not of the world. 17:17Sanctify them in your truth. Your word is truth. 17:18As you sent me into the world, even so I sent them into the world. 17:19For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth. 17:20Neither for these only do I pray, but for those also who believe in me through their word, 17:21that they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that you sent me. 17:22The glory which you have given me, I have given to them; that they may be one, even as we are one; 17:23I in them, and you in me, that they may be perfected into one; that the world may know that you sent me, and loved them, even as you loved me. 17:24Father, I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which you have given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the world. 17:25Righteous Father, the world didn't know you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent me. 17:26I made known to them your name, and will make it known; that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in them."

18:1When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Kidron, where was a garden, into which he entered, himself and his disciples. 18:2Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often resorted there with his disciples. 18:3Judas then, having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. 18:4Jesus therefore, knowing all the things that were coming on him, went forth, and said to them, "Who are you looking for?"

18:5They answered him, "Jesus of Nazareth."

Jesus said to them, "I AM."

Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them. 18:6When therefore he said to them, "I AM," they went backward, and fell to the ground.

18:7Again therefore he asked them, "Who are you looking for?"

They said, "Jesus of Nazareth."

18:8Jesus answered, "I told you that I AM. If therefore you seek me, let these go their way," 18:9that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, "Of those whom you have given me, I have lost none."

18:10Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, and struck the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus. 18:11Jesus therefore said to Peter, "Put up the sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?"

18:12So the detachment, the commanding officer, and the officers of the Jews, seized Jesus and bound him, 18:13and led him to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 18:14Now it was Caiaphas who gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people. 18:15Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did another disciple. Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest; 18:16but Peter was standing at the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and brought in Peter. 18:17Then the maid who kept the door said to Peter, "Are you also one of this man's disciples?"

He said, "I am not."

18:18Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were warming themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself. 18:19The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his teaching. 18:20Jesus answered him, "I spoke openly to the world. I always taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where the Jews always meet. I said nothing in secret. 18:21Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them. Behold, these know the things which I said."

18:22When he had said this, one of the officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, "Do you answer the high priest like that?"

18:23Jesus answered him, "If I have spoken evil, testify of the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?"

18:24Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest. 18:25Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said therefore to him, "Are you also one of his disciples?"

He denied it, and said, "I am not."

18:26One of the servants of the high priest, being a relative of him whose ear Peter cut off, said, "Didn't I see you in the garden with him?"

18:27Peter therefore denied again, and immediately the rooster crowed.

18:28They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn't enter into the Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover. 18:29Pilate therefore went out to them, and said, "What accusation do you bring against this man?"

18:30They answered him, "If this man weren't an evildoer, we wouldn't have delivered him up to you."

18:31Pilate therefore said to them, "Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law."

Therefore the Jews said to him, "It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death," 18:32that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should die.

18:33Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, called Jesus, and said to him, "Are you the King of the Jews?"

18:34Jesus answered him, "Do you say this by yourself, or did others tell you about me?"

18:35Pilate answered, "Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you done?"

18:36Jesus answered, "My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, then my servants would fight, that I wouldn't be delivered to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not from here."

18:37Pilate therefore said to him, "Are you a king then?"

Jesus answered, "You say that I am a king. To this end I have been born, and to this end I have come into the world, that I should testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice."

18:38Pilate said to him, "What is truth?"

When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them, "I find no basis for a charge against him. 18:39But you have a custom, that I should release to you one at the Passover. Therefore do you desire that I release to you the King of the Jews?"

18:40Then they all cried out again, saying, "Not this man, but Barabbas!" Now Barabbas was a robber.

19:1Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and flogged him. 19:2The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown, and put it on his head, and dressed him in a purple garment. 19:3They said, "Hail, King of the Jews!" and they struck him with their hands.

19:4Then Pilate went out again, and said to them, "Behold, I bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him."

19:5Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to them, "Behold, the man!"

19:6When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, saying, "Crucify! Crucify!"

Pilate said to them, "Take him yourselves, and crucify him, for I find no basis for a charge against him."

19:7The Jews answered him, "We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God."

19:8When therefore Pilate heard this saying, he was more afraid. 19:9He entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, "Where are you from?" But Jesus gave him no answer. 19:10Pilate therefore said to him, "Aren't you speaking to me? Don't you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?"

19:11Jesus answered, "You would have no power at all against me, unless it were given to you from above. Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin."

19:12At this, Pilate sought to release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, "If you release this man, you aren't Caesar's friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar!"

19:13When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called "The Pavement," but in Hebrew, "Gabbatha." 19:14Now it was the Preparation of the Passover, at about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, "Behold, your King!"

19:15They cried out, "Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!"

Pilate said to them, "Shall I crucify your King?"

The chief priests answered, "We have no king but Caesar!"

19:16Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away. 19:17He went out, bearing his cross, to the place called "The place of a skull," which is called in Hebrew, "Golgotha," 19:18where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle. 19:19Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. There was written, "JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS." 19:20Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek. 19:21The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, "Don't write, 'The King of the Jews,' but that, 'he said, I am King of the Jews.'"

19:22Pilate answered, "What I have written, I have written."

19:23Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. 19:24Then they said to one another, "Let's not tear it, but cast lots for it, whose it will be," that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says,

 "They parted my garments among them.
      For my cloak they cast lots."

Therefore the soldiers did these things. 19:25But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 19:26Therefore when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, "Woman, behold your son!" 19:27Then he said to the disciple, "Behold, your mother!" From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home.

19:28After this, Jesus, seeing that all things were now finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, "I am thirsty." 19:29Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and brought it to his mouth. 19:30When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, "It is finished." He bowed his head, and gave up his spirit.

19:31Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation, so that the bodies wouldn't remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. 19:32Therefore the soldiers came, and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him; 19:33but when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they didn't break his legs. 19:34However one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out. 19:35He who has seen has testified, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, that you may believe. 19:36For these things happened, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, "A bone of him will not be broken." 19:37Again another Scripture says, "They will look on him whom they pierced."

19:38After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave him permission. He came therefore, and took away his body. 19:39Nicodemus also came, he who at first came to Jesus by night, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred Roman pounds. 19:40So they took Jesus' body, and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury. 19:41Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden. In the garden a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid. 19:42Then because of the Jews' Preparation (for the tomb was near at hand) they laid Jesus there.

20:1Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene came early, while it was yet dark, to the tomb, and saw the stone taken away from the tomb. 20:2She ran therefore, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, "They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have laid him!"

20:3Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they went toward the tomb. 20:4They both ran together. The other disciple outran Peter, and came to the tomb first. 20:5Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen cloths lying, yet he didn't enter in. 20:6Then Simon Peter came, following him, and entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying, 20:7and the cloth that was on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself. 20:8Then the other disciple also entered in therefore, who came first to the tomb, and he saw, and believed. 20:9For as yet they didn't know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. 20:10So the disciples went away again to their own homes.

20:11But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb, 20:12and she saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. 20:13They told her, "Woman, why are you weeping?"

She said to them, "Because they have taken away my Lord, and I don't know where they have laid him." 20:14When she had said this, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and didn't know that it was Jesus.

20:15Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?"

She, supposing him to be the gardener, said to him, "Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away."

20:16Jesus said to her, "Mary."

She turned herself, and said to him, "Rhabbouni!" which is to say, "Teacher!"

20:17Jesus said to her, "Don't touch me, for I haven't yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers, and tell them, 'I am ascending to my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.'"

20:18Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her. 20:19When therefore it was evening, on that day, the first day of the week, and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, "Peace be to you."

20:20When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord. 20:21Jesus therefore said to them again, "Peace be to you. As the Father has sent me, even so I send you." 20:22When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit! 20:23Whoever's sins you forgive, they are forgiven to them. Whoever's sins you retain, they are retained."

20:24But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, wasn't with them when Jesus came. 20:25The other disciples therefore said to him, "We have seen the Lord!"

But he said to them, "Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe."

20:26After eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them. Jesus came, the doors being locked, and stood in the midst, and said, "Peace be to you." 20:27Then he said to Thomas, "Reach here your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your hand, and put it into my side. Don't be faithless, but believing."

20:28Thomas answered him, "My Lord and my God!"

20:29Jesus said to him, "Because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed."

20:30Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book; 20:31but these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.

21:1After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself this way. 21:2Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together. 21:3Simon Peter said to them, "I'm going fishing."

They told him, "We are also coming with you." They immediately went forth, and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing. 21:4But when day was now breaking, Jesus stood on the beach, yet the disciples didn't know that it was Jesus. 21:5Jesus therefore said to them, "Children, have you anything to eat?"

They answered him, "No."

21:6He said to them, "Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some."

They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it in for the multitude of fish. 21:7That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It's the Lord!"

So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his coat around him (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea. 21:8But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits away), dragging the net full of fish. 21:9So when they got out on the land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread. 21:10Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish which you have just caught."

21:11Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of great fish, one hundred fifty-three; and even though there were so many, the net wasn't torn.

21:12Jesus said to them, "Come and eat breakfast."

None of the disciples dared inquire of him, "Who are you?" knowing that it was the Lord.

21:13Then Jesus came and took the bread, gave it to them, and the fish likewise. 21:14This is now the third time that Jesus was revealed to his disciples, after he had risen from the dead. 21:15So when they had eaten their breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?"

He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you."

He said to him, "Feed my lambs." 21:16He said to him again a second time, "Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?"

He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you."

He said to him, "Tend my sheep." 21:17He said to him the third time, "Simon, son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?"

Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time, "Do you have affection for me?" He said to him, "Lord, you know everything. You know that I have affection for you."

Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep. 21:18Most assuredly I tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself, and walked where you wanted to. But when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you, and carry you where you don't want to go."

21:19Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to him, "Follow me."

21:20Then Peter, turning around, saw a disciple following. This was the disciple whom Jesus sincerely loved, the one who had also leaned on Jesus' breast at the supper and asked, "Lord, who is going to betray You?" 21:21Peter seeing him, said to Jesus, "Lord, and what will this man do?"

21:22Jesus said to him, "If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you? You follow me." 21:23This saying therefore went forth among the brothers, that this disciple wouldn't die. Yet Jesus didn't say to him that he wouldn't die, but, "If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you?" 21:24This is the disciple who testifies about these things, and wrote these things. We know that his witness is true. 21:25There are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they would all be written, I suppose that even the world itself wouldn't contain the books that would be written.

Notes:

[1] back to 1:5 The word translated "overcome" (katelaben) can also be translated "comprehended." It refers to getting a grip on an enemy to defeat him.

[2] back to 1:39 about 4:00 PM

[3] back to 1:41 "Messiah" (Hebrew) and "Christ" (Greek) both mean "Anointed One".

[4] back to 2:6 2 to 3 metretes is about 20 to 30 U. S. Gallons, 16 to 25 imperial gallons, or 75 to 115 litres.

[5] back to 3:3 The word translated "anew" here and in John 3:7 (anothen) also means "again" and "from above".

[6] back to 3:8 The same Greek word (pneuma) means wind, breath, and spirit.

[7] back to 3:36 The same word can be translated "disobeys" or "disbelieves" in this context.

[8] back to 4:6 about noon

[9] back to 6:19 25 to 30 stadia is about 5 to 6 kilometers or about 3 to 4 miles

[10] back to 6:31 Greek and Hebrew use the same word for "heaven", "the heavens", "the sky", and "the air".

[11] back to 10:22 The "Feast of the Dedication" is the Greek name for "Chanukkah," a celebration of the rededication of the Temple.

[12] back to 11:18 15 stadia is about 2.8 kilometers or 1.7 miles

[13] back to 12:3 a Roman pound of 12 ounces, or about 340 grams

[14] back to 12:5 300 denarii was about a year's wages for an agricultural laborer.

[15] back to 19:14 about noon

[16] back to 19:39 100 Roman pounds is about 72 pounds or 33 Kilograms.

[17] back to 21:8 200 cubits is about 100 yards or about 91 meters




Acts

1:1The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach, 1:2until the day in which he was received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen. 1:3To these he also shown himself alive after his suffering by many proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days, and spoke about God's kingdom. 1:4Being assembled together with them, he charged them, "Don't depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which you heard from me. 1:5For John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now."

1:6Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him, "Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?"

1:7He said to them, "It isn't for you to know times or seasons which the Father has set within His own authority. 1:8But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come on you. You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth."

1:9When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. 1:10While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white clothing, 1:11who also said, "You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was received up from you into the sky will come back in the same way as you saw him going into the sky." 1:12Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away. 1:13When they had come in, they went up into the upper chamber, where they were staying; that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James. 1:14All these with one accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.

1:15In these days, Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples (and there was a multitude of persons gathered together, about one hundred twenty), and said, 1:16"Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus. 1:17For he was numbered with us, and received his portion in this ministry. 1:18Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness, and falling headlong, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed out. 1:19It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called 'Akeldama,' that is, 'The field of blood.' 1:20For it is written in the book of Psalms,

 'Let his habitation be made desolate,
      Let no one dwell therein,'

and,

 'Let another take his office.'

1:21Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us, 1:22beginning from the baptism of John, to the day that he was received up from us, of these must one become a witness with us of his resurrection."

1:23They put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. 1:24They prayed, and said, "You, Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you have chosen 1:25to take part in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place." 1:26They drew lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

2:1Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one accord in one place. 2:2Suddenly there came from the sky a sound like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. 2:3Tongues like fire appeared and were distributed to them, and it sat on each one of them. 2:4They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak. 2:5Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation under the sky. 2:6When this sound was heard, the multitude came together, and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking in his own language. 2:7They were all amazed and marveled, saying to one another, "Behold, aren't all these who speak Galileans? 2:8How do we hear, everyone in our own native language? 2:9Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, 2:10Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes, 2:11Cretans and Arabians: we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!" 2:12They were all amazed, and were perplexed, saying one to another, "What does this mean?" 2:13Others, mocking, said, "They are filled with new wine."

2:14But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and spoke out to them, "You men of Judea, and all you who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words. 2:15For these aren't drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is only the third hour of the day. 2:16But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel:

 2:17'It will be in the last days, says God,
      I will pour forth of my Spirit on all flesh.

 Your sons and your daughters will prophesy.
      Your young men will see visions.
      Your old men will dream dreams.

 2:18Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days,
      I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy.

 2:19I will show wonders in the the sky above,
      And signs on the earth beneath;
      Blood, and fire, and billows of smoke.

 2:20The sun will be turned into darkness,
      And the moon into blood,
      Before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.
      2:21It will be, that whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.'

2:22"You men of Israel, hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, even as you yourselves know, 2:23him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed; 2:24whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it. 2:25For David says concerning him,

 'I saw the Lord always before my face,
      For he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.

 2:26Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced.
      Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope;

 2:27Because you will not leave my soul in Hades,
      Neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay.

 2:28You made known to me the ways of life.
      You will make me full of gladness with your presence.'

2:29"Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day. 2:30Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne, 2:31he foreseeing this spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was his soul left in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay. 2:32This Jesus God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses. 2:33Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured forth this, which you now see and hear. 2:34For David didn't ascend into the heavens, but he says himself,

 'The Lord said to my Lord, "Sit by my right hand,

 2:35Until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet."'

2:36"Let all the house of Israel therefore know assuredly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified."

2:37Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, "Brothers, what will we do?"

2:38Peter said to them, "Repent, and be baptized, everyone of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 2:39For to you is the promise, and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself." 2:40With many other words he testified, and exhorted them, saying, "Save yourselves from this crooked generation!"

2:41Then those who gladly received his word were baptized. There were added that day about three thousand souls. 2:42They continued steadfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and prayer. 2:43Fear came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles. 2:44All who believed were together, and had all things common. 2:45They sold their possessions and goods, and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need. 2:46Day by day, continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart, 2:47praising God, and having favor with all the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved.

3:1Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour. 3:2A certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple. 3:3Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy. 3:4Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with John, said, "Look at us." 3:5He listened to them, expecting to receive something from them. 3:6But Peter said, "Silver and gold have I none, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise and walk!" 3:7He took him by the right hand, and raised him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength. 3:8Leaping up, he stood, and began to walk. He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God. 3:9All the people saw him walking and praising God. 3:10They recognized him, that it was he who sat begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. They were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened to him. 3:11As the lame man who was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's, greatly wondering. 3:12When Peter saw it, he answered to the people, "You men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk? 3:13The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up, and denied before the face of Pilate, when he had determined to release him. 3:14But you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked for a murderer to be granted to you, 3:15and killed the Prince of life, whom God raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses. 3:16By faith in his name has his name made this man strong, whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

3:17"Now, brothers, I know that you did this in ignorance, as did also your rulers. 3:18But the things which God announced by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled. 3:19Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, that so there may come times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, 3:20and that he may send Christ Jesus, who was ordained for you before, 3:21whom the heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, whereof God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets that have been from ancient times. 3:22For Moses indeed said to the fathers, 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet to you from among your brothers, like me. You will listen to him in all things whatever he says to you. 3:23It will be, that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.' 3:24Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of these days. 3:25You are the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, 'In your seed will all the families of the earth be blessed.' 3:26God, having raised up his servant, Jesus, sent him to you first, to bless you, in turning away everyone of you from your wickedness."

4:1As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them, 4:2being upset because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead. 4:3They laid hands on them, and put them in custody until the next day, for it was now evening. 4:4But many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.

4:5It happened in the morning, that their rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem. 4:6Annas the high priest was there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of the high priest. 4:7When they had stood them in the midst, they inquired, "By what power, or in what name, have you done this?"

4:8Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, "You rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, 4:9if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed, 4:10be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, in him does this man stand here before you whole. 4:11He is 'the stone which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which was made the head of the corner.' 4:12There is salvation in none other, for neither is there any other name under heaven, that is given among men, in which we must be saved!"

4:13Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled. They recognized that they had been with Jesus. 4:14Seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it. 4:15But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves, 4:16saying, "What will we do to these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them, as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can't deny it. 4:17But so that this spreads no further among the people, let's threaten them, that from now on they don't speak to anyone in this name." 4:18They called them, and charged them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.

4:19But Peter and John answered them, "Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves, 4:20for we can't help telling the things which we saw and heard."

4:21They, when they had further threatened them, let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone glorified God for that which was done. 4:22For the man was more than forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was performed.

4:23Being let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them. 4:24They, when they heard it, lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, "O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them; 4:25who by the mouth of your servant, David, said,

 'Why do the nations rage,
      And the peoples plot a vain thing?

 4:26The kings of the earth take a stand,
      And the rulers take council together,
      Against the Lord, and against his Christ.'

4:27For truly, in this city against your holy servant, Jesus, whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together 4:28to do whatever your hand and your council foreordained to happen. 4:29Now, Lord, look at their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness, 4:30while you stretch forth your hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus."

4:31When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness. 4:32The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common. 4:33With great power, the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them all. 4:34For neither was there among them any who lacked, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, 4:35and laid them at the apostles' feet, and distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need. 4:36Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of Exhortation), a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race, 4:37having a field, sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.

5:1But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira, his wife, sold a possession, 5:2and kept back part of the price, his wife also being aware of it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' feet. 5:3But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the land? 5:4While you kept it, didn't it remain your own? After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it that you have conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to men, but to God."

5:5Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great fear came on all who heard these things. 5:6The young men arose and wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him. 5:7About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in. 5:8Peter answered her, "Tell me whether you sold the land for so much."

She said, "Yes, for so much."

5:9But Peter asked her, "How is it that you have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out."

5:10She fell down immediately at his feet, and died. The young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband. 5:11Great fear came on the whole assembly, and on all who heard these things. 5:12By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one accord in Solomon's porch. 5:13None of the rest dared to join them, however the people honored them. 5:14More believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women. 5:15They even carried out the sick into the streets, and laid them on cots and mattresses, so that as Peter came by, at the least his shadow might overshadow some of them. 5:16Multitudes also came together from the cities around Jerusalem, bringing sick people, and those who were tormented by unclean spirits: and they were all healed.

5:17But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy, 5:18and laid hands on the apostles, and put them in public custody. 5:19But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and brought them out, and said, 5:20"Go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life." 5:21When they heard this, they entered into the temple about daybreak, and taught. But the high priest came, and those who were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought. 5:22But the officers who came didn't find them in the prison. They returned and reported, 5:23"We found the prison shut and locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we had opened it up, we found no one inside."

5:24Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them and what might become of this. 5:25One came and told them, "Behold, the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people." 5:26Then the captain went with the officers, and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people might stone them.

5:27When they had brought them, they set them before the council. The high priest questioned them, 5:28saying, "Didn't we strictly charge you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood on us."

5:29But Peter and the apostles answered, "We must obey God rather than men. 5:30The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, hanging him on a tree. 5:31God exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. 5:32We are His witnesses of these things; and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him."

5:33But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and determined to kill them. 5:34But one stood up in the council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the people, and commanded to take the apostles out a little while. 5:35He said to them, "You men of Israel, be careful concerning these men, what you are about to do. 5:36For before these days Theudas rose up, making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, and came to nothing. 5:37After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some people after him. He also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad. 5:38Now I tell you, refrain from these men, and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it will be overthrown. 5:39But if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against God." 5:40They agreed with him. When they had called the apostles to them, they beat them and charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. 5:41They therefore departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus' name.

5:42Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.

6:1Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, there arose a grumbling of the Grecian Jews against the Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily service. 6:2The twelve called the multitude of the disciples to them and said, "It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables. 6:3Therefore select from among you, brothers, seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. 6:4But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the word." 6:5These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch; 6:6whom they set before the apostles. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. 6:7The word of God increased and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly. A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith. 6:8Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people. 6:9But some of those who were of the synagogue called "The Libertines," and of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with Stephen. 6:10They weren't able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke. 6:11Then they secretly induced men who said, "We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God." 6:12They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and came on him and seized him, and brought him in to the council, 6:13and set up false witnesses who said, "This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law. 6:14For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us." 6:15All who sat in the council, fastening their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.

7:1The high priest said, "Are these things so?"

7:2He said, "Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran, 7:3and said to him, 'Get out of your land, and from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.' 7:4Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and lived in Haran. From there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land, where you are now living. 7:5He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him in possession, and to his seed after him, when he still had no child. 7:6God spoke thus, that his seed would live as aliens in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years. 7:7'I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage,' said God, 'and after that will they come out, and serve me in this place.' 7:8He gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.

7:9"The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. God was with him, 7:10and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house. 7:11Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction. Our fathers found no food. 7:12But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent forth our fathers the first time. 7:13On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and Joseph's race was revealed to Pharaoh. 7:14Joseph sent, and called Jacob, his father, to him, and all his relatives, seventy-five souls. 7:15Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died, himself and our fathers, 7:16and they were brought back to Shechem, and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the sons of Hamor of Shechem.

7:17"But as the time of the promise came close which God swore to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, 7:18until there arose a different king, who didn't know Joseph. 7:19The same dealt slyly with our race, and mistreated our fathers, that they should throw out their babies, so that they wouldn't stay alive. 7:20At that time Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome. He was nourished three months in his father's house. 7:21When he was thrown out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and reared him as her own son. 7:22Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works. 7:23But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel. 7:24Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian. 7:25He supposed that his brothers understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they didn't understand. 7:26The day following, he appeared to them as they fought, and urged them to be at peace again, saying, 'Sirs, you are brothers. Why do you wrong one to another?' 7:27But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed him away, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? 7:28Do you want to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?' 7:29Moses fled at this saying, and became an alien in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.

7:30"When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush. 7:31When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he came close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him, 7:32'I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' Moses trembled, and dared not look. 7:33The Lord said to him, 'Take your sandals off of your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground. 7:34I have surely seen the affliction of my people that is in Egypt, and have heard their groaning. I have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.'

7:35"This Moses, whom they refused, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge?' -- God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer with the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 7:36This man led them forth, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years. 7:37This is that Moses, who said to the children of Israel, 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet to you from among your brothers, like me.' 7:38This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him in the Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, who received living oracles to give to us, 7:39to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient, but rejected him, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt, 7:40saying to Aaron, 'Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses, who led us forth out of the land of Egypt, we don't know what has become of him.' 7:41They made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands. 7:42But God turned, and gave them up to serve the host of the sky, as it is written in the book of the prophets,

 'Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices
      Forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?

 7:43You took up the tent of Moloch,
      The star of your god Rephan,

 The figures which you made to worship.
      I will carry you away beyond Babylon.'

7:44"Our fathers had the tent of the testimony in the wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses appointed, that he should make it according to the pattern that he had seen. 7:45Which also our fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, to the days of David, 7:46who found favor in the sight of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob. 7:47But Solomon built him a house. 7:48However, the Most High doesn't dwell in temples made with hands, as the prophet says,

 7:49'heaven is my throne,
      And the earth the footstool of my feet.

 What kind of house will you build me?' says the Lord;
      'Or what is the place of my rest?

 7:50Didn't my hand make all these things?'

7:51"You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do. 7:52Which of the prophets didn't your fathers persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers. 7:53You received the law as it was ordained by angels, and didn't keep it!"

7:54Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth. 7:55But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, 7:56and said, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God!" 7:57But they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and rushed at him with one accord. 7:58They threw him out of the city, and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul. 7:59They stoned Stephen as he called out, saying, "Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit!" 7:60He kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, "Lord, don't hold this sin against them!" When he had said this, he fell asleep.

8:1Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for the apostles. 8:2Devout men buried Stephen, and lamented greatly over him. 8:3But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into every house, and dragged both men and women off to prison. 8:4Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word. 8:5Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and proclaimed to them the Christ. 8:6The multitudes listened with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs which he did. 8:7For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed. 8:8There was great joy in that city.

8:9But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who had used sorcery in the city before, and amazed the people of Samaria, making himself out to be some great one, 8:10to whom they all listened, from the least to the greatest, saying, "This man is that great power of God." 8:11They listened to him, because for a long time he had amazed them with his sorceries. 8:12But when they believed Philip preaching good news concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. 8:13Simon himself also believed. Being baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles done, he was amazed. 8:14Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them, 8:15who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit; 8:16for as yet he had fallen on none of them. They had only been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus. 8:17Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit. 8:18Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them money, 8:19saying, "Give me also this power, that whoever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit." 8:20But Peter said to him, "May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money! 8:21You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart isn't right before God. 8:22Repent therefore of this, your wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you. 8:23For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity."

8:24Simon answered, "Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the things which you have spoken come on me."

8:25They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans. 8:26But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, "Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert."

8:27He arose and went. Behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship. 8:28He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah. 8:29The Spirit said to Philip, "Go near, and join yourself to this chariot." 8:30Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, "Do you understand what you are reading?" 8:31He said, "How can I, unless someone explains it to me?" He begged Philip to come up and sit with him. 8:32Now the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this,

 "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter.
      As a lamb before his shearer is silent,
      So he doesn't open his mouth.

 8:33In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away.
      Who will declare His generations?
      For his life is taken from the earth."

8:34The eunuch answered Philip, "Please tell who the prophet is talking about: about himself, or about some other?"

8:35Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached to him Jesus. 8:36As they went on the way, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, "Behold, here is water. What is keeping me from being baptized?"

8:37* 8:38He commanded the chariot to stand still, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.

8:39When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any more, for he went on his way rejoicing. 8:40But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing through, he preached the gospel to all the cities, until he came to Caesarea.

9:1But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest, 9:2and asked for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. 9:3As he traveled, it happened that he got close to Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him. 9:4He fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?"

9:5He said, "Who are you, Lord?"

The Lord said, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. 9:6But rise up, and enter into the city, and you will be told what you must do."

9:7The men who traveled with him stood speechless, hearing the voice, but seeing no one. 9:8Saul arose from the ground, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. 9:9He was without sight for three days, and neither ate nor drank.

9:10Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, "Ananias!"

He said, "Behold, it's me, Lord."

9:11The Lord said to him, "Arise, and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying, 9:12and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight."

9:13But Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem. 9:14Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name."

9:15But the Lord said to him, "Go your way, for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the children of Israel. 9:16For I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name's sake."

9:17Ananias departed, and entered into the house. Laying his hands on him, he said, "Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you in the way which you came, has sent me, that you may receive your sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit." 9:18Immediately there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he received his sight. He arose and was baptized. 9:19He took food and was strengthened. Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus. 9:20Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God. 9:21All who heard him were amazed, and said, "Isn't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests!"

9:22But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ. 9:23When many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together to kill him, 9:24but their plot became known to Saul. They watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him, 9:25but his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket. 9:26When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join himself to the disciples. They were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. 9:27But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus. 9:28He was with them going in and going out at Jerusalem, 9:29preaching boldly in the name of the Lord. He spoke and disputed against the Grecian Jews, but they were seeking to kill him. 9:30When the brothers knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him out to Tarsus. 9:31So the assemblies throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, and were built up. They were multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit.

9:32It happened, as Peter went throughout all those parts, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda. 9:33There he found a certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years, because he was paralyzed. 9:34Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!" Immediately he arose. 9:35All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.

9:36Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which when translated, means Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy which she did. 9:37It happened in those days that she fell sick, and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper chamber. 9:38As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him not to delay in coming to them. 9:39Peter got up and went with them. When he had come, they brought him into the upper chamber. All the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with them. 9:40Peter put them all out, and kneeled down and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, "Tabitha, get up!" She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up. 9:41He gave her his hand, and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive. 9:42It became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord. 9:43It happened, that he stayed many days in Joppa with one Simon, a tanner.

10:1Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment, 10:2a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people, and always prayed to God. 10:3At about the ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him, and saying to him, "Cornelius!"

10:4He, fastening his eyes on him, and being frightened, said, "What is it, Lord?"

He said to him, "Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God. 10:5Now send men to Joppa, and get Simon, who is surnamed Peter. 10:6He lodges with one Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the seaside."

10:7When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who waited on him continually. 10:8Having explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa. 10:9Now on the next day as they were on their journey, and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon. 10:10He became hungry and desired to eat, but while they were preparing, he fell into a trance. 10:11He saw heaven opened and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by four corners on the earth, 10:12in which were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky. 10:13A voice came to him, "Rise, Peter, kill and eat!"

10:14But Peter said, "Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean."

10:15A voice came to him again the second time, "What God has cleansed, you must not make unholy." 10:16This was done three times, and immediately the vessel was received up into heaven. 10:17Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon's house, stood before the gate, 10:18and called and asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, was lodging there. 10:19While Peter thought about the vision, the Spirit said to him, "Behold, three men seek you. 10:20But arise, get down, and go with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent them." 10:21Peter went down to the men, and said, "Behold, I am he whom you seek. Why have you come?"

10:22They said, "Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to what you say. 10:23So he called them in and lodged them. On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him. 10:24On the next day they entered into Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his relatives and his near friends. 10:25When it happened that Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him. 10:26But Peter raised him up, saying, "Stand up! I myself am also a man." 10:27As he talked with him, he went in and found many gathered together. 10:28He said to them, "You yourselves know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't call any man unholy or unclean. 10:29Therefore also I came without complaint when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?"

10:30Cornelius said, "Four days ago, I was fasting until this hour, and at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing, 10:31and said, 'Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God. 10:32Send therefore to Joppa, and call to you Simon, who is surnamed Peter. He lodges in the house of Simon a tanner, by the seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.' 10:33Therefore I sent to you at once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God."

10:34Peter opened his mouth and said, "Truly I perceive that God doesn't show favoritism; 10:35but in every nation he who fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. 10:36The word which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ -- he is Lord of all -- 10:37that spoken word you yourselves know, which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached; 10:38even Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him. 10:39We are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they also killed, hanging him on a tree. 10:40God raised him up the third day, and gave him to be revealed, 10:41not to all the people, but to witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. 10:42He charged us to preach to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead. 10:43All the prophets testify about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins."

10:44While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word. 10:45They of the circumcision who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles. 10:46For they heard them speak with other languages and magnify God.

Then Peter answered, 10:47"Can any man forbid the water, that these who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we should not be baptized?" 10:48He commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.

11:1Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. 11:2When Peter had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision contended with him, 11:3saying, "You went in to uncircumcised men, and ate with them!"

11:4But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying, 11:5"I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me, 11:6on which, when I had looked intently, I considered, and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky. 11:7I also heard a voice saying to me, 'Rise, Peter, kill and eat!' 11:8But I said, 'Not so, Lord, for nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.' 11:9But a voice answered me the second time out of heaven, 'What God has cleansed, don't you make unholy.' 11:10This was done three times, and all were drawn up again into heaven. 11:11Behold, immediately three men stood before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me. 11:12The Spirit told me to go with them, without discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered into the man's house. 11:13He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and saying to him, 'Send to Joppa, and get Simon, whose surname is Peter, 11:14who will speak to you words whereby you will be saved, you and all your house.' 11:15As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning. 11:16I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, 'John indeed baptized with water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.' 11:17If then God gave to them the same gift as us, when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?"

11:18When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, "Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life!"

11:19They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except only to Jews. 11:20But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Greeks, preaching the Lord Jesus. 11:21The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. 11:22The report concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent forth Barnabas to go as far as Antioch, 11:23who, when he had come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would remain near to the Lord. 11:24For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord.

11:25Barnabas went forth to Tarsus to look for Saul. 11:26When he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. It happened, that even for a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.

11:27Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 11:28One of them named Agabus stood up, and indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine over all the world, which also happened in the days of Claudius. 11:29The disciples, as anyone had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea; 11:30which they also did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

12:1Now about that time, Herod the king put forth his hands to oppress some of the assembly. 12:2He killed James, the brother of John, with the sword. 12:3When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened bread. 12:4When he had captured him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover. 12:5Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him. 12:6The same night when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison. 12:7Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side, and woke him up, saying, "Stand up quickly!" His chains fell off from his hands. 12:8The angel said to him, "Put on your clothes, and tie on your sandals." He did so. He said to him, "Wrap your cloak around you, and follow me." 12:9He went out, and followed him. He didn't know that what was done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision. 12:10When they were past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out, and passed on through one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.

12:11When Peter had come to himself, he said, "Now I truly know that the Lord has sent forth his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting." 12:12Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying. 12:13When Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a maid named Rhoda came to answer. 12:14When she recognized Peter's voice, she didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in, and reported that Peter stood before the gate. 12:15They said to her, "You are crazy!" But she insisted that it was so. They said, "It is his angel." 12:16But Peter continued knocking. When they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed. 12:17But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, declared to them how the Lord had brought him forth out of the prison. He said, "Tell these things to James, and to the brothers." He departed, and went to another place.

12:18Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter. 12:19When Herod had sought for him, and didn't find him, he examined the guards, and commanded that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea, and stayed there. 12:20Now Herod was highly displeased with those of Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus, the king's chamberlain, their friend, they asked for peace, because their country depended on the king's country for food. 12:21On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them. 12:22The people shouted, "The voice of a god, and not of a man!" 12:23Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him, because he didn't give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms, and he died.

12:24But the word of God grew and multiplied. 12:25Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their service, also taking with them John whose surname was Mark.

13:1Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 13:2As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, "Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called them." 13:3Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. 13:4So, being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus. 13:5When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. They had also John as their attendant. 13:6When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar-Jesus, 13:7who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of understanding. The same called Barnabas and Saul to him, and sought to hear the word of God. 13:8But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the proconsul from the faith. 13:9But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him, 13:10and said, "Full of all deceit and all cunning, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? 13:11Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!"

Immediately there fell on him a mist and darkness. He went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand. 13:12Then the proconsul, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.

13:13Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos, and came to Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem. 13:14But they, passing through from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down. 13:15After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, "Brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak."

13:16Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, "Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen. 13:17The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them forth out of it. 13:18For about the time of forty years he put up with them in the wilderness. 13:19When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance, for about four hundred and fifty years. 13:20After these things he gave them judges until Samuel, the prophet. 13:21Afterward they asked for a king, and God gave to them Saul, the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 13:22When he had removed him, he raised up David to be their king, to whom he also testified, 'I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.' 13:23From this man's seed, God has brought salvation to Israel according to his promise, 13:24before his coming, when John had first preached the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. 13:25As John was fulfilling his course, he said, 'What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, there comes one after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.' 13:26Brothers, children of the stock of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation is sent forth to you. 13:27For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him. 13:28Though they found no cause of death, they still asked Pilate to have him killed. 13:29When they had fulfilled all things that were written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a tomb. 13:30But God raised him from the dead, 13:31and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people. 13:32We bring you good news of the promise made to the fathers, 13:33that God has fulfilled the same to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the second psalm,

 'You are my Son.
      Today I have become your father.'

13:34"Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: 'I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.' 13:35Therefore he says also in another psalm, 'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.' 13:36For David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, and was laid with his fathers, and saw decay. 13:37But he whom God raised up saw no decay. 13:38Be it known to you therefore, brothers, that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins, 13:39and by him everyone who believes is justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses. 13:40Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is spoken in the prophets:

 13:41'Behold, you scoffers, and wonder, and perish;

 For I work a work in your days,

 A work which you will in no way believe, if one declares it to you.'"

13:42So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath. 13:43Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God. 13:44The next Sabbath almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God. 13:45But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul, and blasphemed. 13:46Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, "It was necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles. 13:47For so has the Lord commanded us, saying,

 'I have set you as a light of the Gentiles,
      That you should be for salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.'"

13:48As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed. 13:49The Lord's word was spread abroad throughout all the region. 13:50But the Jews urged on the devout women of honorable estate, and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders. 13:51But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium. 13:52The disciples were filled with joy with the Holy Spirit.

14:1It happened in Iconium that they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed. 14:2But the disobedient Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers. 14:3Therefore they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands. 14:4But the multitude of the city was divided. Part sided with the Jews, and part with the apostles. 14:5When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to insult them and to stone them, 14:6they became aware of it, and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region. 14:7There they preached the gospel.

14:8At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked. 14:9He was listening to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be made whole, 14:10said with a loud voice, "Stand upright on your feet!" He leaped up and walked. 14:11When the multitude saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia, "The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!" 14:12They called Barnabas "Jupiter," and Paul "Mercury," because he was the chief speaker. 14:13The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have made a sacrifice with the multitudes. 14:14But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes, and sprang into the multitude, crying out, 14:15"Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the sky and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them; 14:16who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. 14:17Yet he didn't leave himself without witness, in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness."

14:18Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them. 14:19But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.

14:20But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to Derbe. 14:21When they had preached the gospel to that city, and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, 14:22confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. 14:23When they had appointed elders for them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.

14:24They passed through Pisidia, and came to Pamphylia. 14:25When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia. 14:26From there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled. 14:27When they had arrived, and had gathered the assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles. 14:28They stayed there with the disciples for a long time.

15:1Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers, "Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you can't be saved." 15:2Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and some others of them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question. 15:3They, being sent on their way by the assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers. 15:4When they had come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they reported all things that God had done with them. 15:5But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up, saying, "It is necessary to circumcise them, and to charge them to keep the law of Moses." 15:6The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter. 15:7When there had been much discussion, Peter rose up and said to them, "Brothers, you know that a good while ago God made choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the gospel, and believe. 15:8God, who knows the heart, testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to us. 15:9He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith. 15:10Now therefore why do you tempt God, that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? 15:11But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are."

15:12All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them. 15:13After they were silent, James answered, "Brothers, listen to me. 15:14Simeon has reported how God first visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name. 15:15This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is written,

 15:16'After these things I will return.
      I will again build the tent of David, which has fallen.
      I will again build its ruins.

 I will set it up:

 15:17That the rest of men may seek after the Lord;
      All the Gentiles who are called by my name,

 Says the Lord, who does all these things.
      15:18All his works are known to God from eternity.'

15:19"Therefore my judgment is that we don't trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God, 15:20but that we write to them that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood. 15:21For Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every Sabbath."

15:22Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers. 15:23They wrote these things by their hand:

"The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia: greetings. 15:24Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words, unsettling your souls, saying, 'You must be circumcised and keep the law,' to whom we gave no commandment; 15:25it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 15:26men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 15:27We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth. 15:28For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things: 15:29that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual immorality, from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell."

15:30So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter. 15:31When they had read it, they rejoiced for the consolation. 15:32Judas and Silas, also being prophets themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words, and strengthened them. 15:33After they had spent some time there, they were sent back with greetings from the brothers to the apostles. 15:34* 15:35But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also. 15:36After some days Paul said to Barnabas, "Let's return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing." 15:37Barnabas planned to take John with them also, who was called Mark. 15:38But Paul didn't think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who withdrew from them from Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the work. 15:39Then there arose a sharp contention, so that they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed away to Cyprus, 15:40but Paul chose Silas, and went out, being commended by the brothers to the grace of God. 15:41He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the assemblies.

16:1He came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed; but his father was a Greek. 16:2The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium gave a good testimony about him. 16:3Paul wanted to have him go forth with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 16:4As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem. 16:5So the assemblies were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily.

16:6When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. 16:7When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them. 16:8Passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas. 16:9A vision appeared to Paul in the night. There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him, and saying, "Come over into Macedonia and help us." 16:10When he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go forth into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them. 16:11Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis; 16:12and from there to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the first of the district, a Roman colony. We were staying some days in this city.

16:13On the Sabbath day we went forth outside of the city by a riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down, and spoke to the women who had come together. 16:14A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who worshiped God, heard us; whose heart the Lord opened to listen to the things which were spoken by Paul. 16:15When she and her household were baptized, she begged us, saying, "If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and stay." She urged us.

16:16It happened, as we were going to prayer, that a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by fortune telling. 16:17The same, following after Paul and us, cried out, "These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us the way of salvation!" 16:18This she did for many days. But Paul, becoming distressed, turned and said to the spirit, "I charge you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!" It came out that very hour. 16:19But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they laid hold on Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers. 16:20When they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, "These men, being Jews, are agitating our city, 16:21and set forth customs which it is not lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans." 16:22The multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates tore their clothes off of them, and commanded them to be beaten with rods. 16:23When they had laid many stripes on them, they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely, 16:24who, having received such a charge, threw them into the inner prison, and secured their feet in the stocks.

16:25But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them. 16:26Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone's bonds were loosened. 16:27The jailer, being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped. 16:28But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, "Don't harm yourself, for we are all here!"

16:29He called for lights and sprang in, and, fell down trembling before Paul and Silas, 16:30and brought them out and said, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"

16:31They said, "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved, you and your house." 16:32They spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all who were in his house.

16:33He took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and all his household. 16:34He brought them up into his house, and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his house, having believed in God.

16:35But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, "Let those men go." 16:36The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, "The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out, and go in peace."

16:37But Paul said to them, "They have beaten us publicly, without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do they now release us secretly? No, most assuredly, but let them come themselves and bring us out!"

16:38The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans, 16:39and they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they asked them to depart from the city. 16:40They went out of the prison, and entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers, they comforted them, and departed.

17:1Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. 17:2Paul, as was his custom, went in to them, and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures, 17:3explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer, and to rise again from the dead, and saying, "This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ."

17:4Some of them were persuaded, and joined Paul and Silas, of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women. 17:5But the disobedient Jews gathered some wicked men from the marketplace, and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them forth to the people. 17:6When they didn't find them, they dragged Jason and certain brothers before the rulers of the city, crying, "These who have turned the world upside down have come here also, 17:7whom Jason has received. These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!" 17:8The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when they heard these things. 17:9When they had taken security from Jason and the rest, they let them go. 17:10The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.

17:11Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the mind, examining the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so. 17:12Many of them therefore believed; also of the Greek women of honorable estate, and not a few men. 17:13But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also, they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes. 17:14Then the brothers immediately sent forth Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas and Timothy still stayed there. 17:15But those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they should come to him with all speed, they departed.

17:16Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols. 17:17So he reasoned in the synagogue with Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who met him. 17:18Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also encountered him. Some said, "What does this babbler want to say?" Others said, "He seems to be advocating foreign demons," because he preached Jesus and the resurrection. 17:19They took hold of him, and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, "May we know what this new teaching is, which is spoken by you? 17:20For you bring certain strange things to our ears. We want to know therefore what these things mean." 17:21Now all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.

17:22Paul stood in the midst of the Areopagus, and said, "You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things. 17:23For as I passed along, and observed the objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: 'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I announce to you. 17:24The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands, 17:25neither is he served by men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath, and all things. 17:26He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation, 17:27that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us. 17:28'For in him we live, and move, and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his offspring.' 17:29Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone, engraved by art and device of man. 17:30The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all men everywhere should repent, 17:31because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead."

17:32Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, "We want to hear you yet again concerning this."

17:33Thus Paul went out from among them. 17:34But certain men joined with him, and believed, among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

18:1After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth. 18:2He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome. He came to them, 18:3and because he practiced the same trade, he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers. 18:4He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks. 18:5But when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ. 18:6When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his clothing and said to them, "Your blood be on your own heads! I am clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!"

18:7He departed there, and went into the house of a certain man named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the synagogue. 18:8Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed and were baptized. 18:9The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision, "Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent; 18:10for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city."

18:11He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them. 18:12But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat, 18:13saying, "This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the law."

18:14But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, "If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime, Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you; 18:15but if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look to it yourselves. For I don't want to be a judge of these matters." 18:16He drove them from the judgment seat.

18:17Then all the Greeks laid hold on Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. Gallio didn't care about any of these things.

18:18Paul, having stayed after this yet many days, took his leave of the brothers, and sailed from there for Syria, and Priscilla and Aquila with him. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow. 18:19He came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews. 18:20When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined; 18:21but taking his leave of them, and saying, "I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return again to you if God wills," he set sail from Ephesus.

18:22When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the assembly, and went down to Antioch. 18:23Having spent some time there, he departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples. 18:24Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures. 18:25This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John. 18:26He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately. 18:27When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him. When he had come, he helped them much, who had believed through grace; 18:28for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

19:1It happened that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus, and found certain disciples. 19:2He said to them, "Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?"

They said to him, "No, we haven't even heard that there is a Holy Spirit."

19:3He said, "Into what then were you baptized?"

They said, "Into John's baptism."

19:4Paul said, "John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him, that is, on Jesus."

19:5When they heard this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus. 19:6When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke with other languages, and prophesied. 19:7They were about twelve men in all. 19:8He entered into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for a period of three months, reasoning and persuading about the things concerning the kingdom of God.

19:9But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus. 19:10This continued for the space of two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. 19:11God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul, 19:12so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to the sick, and the evil spirits went out. 19:13But some of the itinerant Jews, exorcists, took on themselves to name over those who had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, "We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches." 19:14There were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this. 19:15The evil spirit answered, "Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?" 19:16The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. 19:17This became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 19:18Many also of those who had believed came, confessing, and declaring their deeds. 19:19Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all. They counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. 19:20So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty.

19:21Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, "After I have been there, I must also see Rome." 19:22Having sent into Macedonia two of those who ministered to him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while. 19:23About that time there arose no small stir concerning the Way. 19:24For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen, 19:25whom he gathered together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, "Sirs, you know that by this business we have our wealth. 19:26You see and hear, that not at Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying that they are no gods, that are made with hands. 19:27Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as nothing, and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worships."

19:28When they heard this they were filled with anger, and cried out, saying, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!" 19:29The whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the theater, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel. 19:30When Paul wanted to enter in to the people, the disciples didn't allow him. 19:31Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater. 19:32Some therefore cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn't know why they had come together. 19:33They brought Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made a defense to the people. 19:34But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"

19:35When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, "You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't know that the city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of the image which fell down from Zeus? 19:36Seeing then that these things can't be denied, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash. 19:37For you have brought these men here, who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess. 19:38If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him, have a matter against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one another. 19:39But if you seek anything about other matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly. 19:40For indeed we are in danger of being accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause. Concerning it, we wouldn't be able to give an account of this commotion." 19:41When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

20:1After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia. 20:2When he had gone through those parts, and had encouraged them with many words, he came into Greece. 20:3When he had spent three months there, and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia. 20:4These accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia. 20:5But these had gone ahead, and were waiting for us at Troas. 20:6We sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where we stayed seven days.

20:7On the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day, and continued his speech until midnight. 20:8There were many lights in the upper chamber where we were gathered together. 20:9A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third story, and was taken up dead. 20:10Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said, "Don't be troubled, for his life is in him."

20:11When he had gone up, and had broken bread, and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he departed. 20:12They brought the boy alive, and were not a little comforted.

20:13But we who went ahead to the ship set sail for Assos, there intending to take in Paul, for he had so arranged, intending himself to go by land. 20:14When he met us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene. 20:15Sailing from there, we came the following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus. 20:16For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

20:17From Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to himself the elders of the assembly. 20:18When they had come to him, he said to them, "You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia, how I was with you all the time, 20:19serving the Lord with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plots of the Jews; 20:20how I didn't shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to house, 20:21testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. 20:22Now, behold, I go bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there; 20:23except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me. 20:24But these things don't count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully testify to the gospel of the grace of God. 20:25Now, behold, I know that you all, among whom I went about preaching the kingdom of God, will see my face no more. 20:26Therefore I testify to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men, 20:27for I didn't shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God. 20:28Take heed, therefore, to yourselves, and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his own blood. 20:29For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 20:30Men will arise from among your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them. 20:31Therefore watch, remembering that for a period of three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day with tears. 20:32Now, brothers, I entrust you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified. 20:33I coveted no one's silver, or gold, or clothing. 20:34You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to those who were with me. 20:35In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'"

20:36When he had spoken these things, he kneeled down and prayed with them all. 20:37They all wept a lot, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, 20:38sorrowing most of all because of the word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. They brought him on his way to the ship.

21:1When it happened that we had parted from them and had set sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara. 21:2Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail. 21:3When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload her cargo. 21:4Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. 21:5When it happened that we had accomplished the days, we departed and went on our journey. They all, with wives and children, brought us on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed. 21:6After saying goodbye to each other, we went on board the ship, and they returned home again.

21:7When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers, and stayed with them one day. 21:8On the next day, we, who were Paul's companions, departed, and came to Caesarea.

We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him. 21:9Now this man had four virgin daughters, who prophesied. 21:10As we stayed there some days, a certain prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judea. 21:11Coming to us, and taking Paul's belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, "Thus says the Holy Spirit: 'So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.'"

21:12When we heard these things, both we and they of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 21:13Then Paul answered, "What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus."

21:14When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, "The Lord's will be done."

21:15After these days we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem. 21:16Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we would stay.

21:17When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly. 21:18The day following, Paul went in with us to James; and all the elders were present. 21:19When he had greeted them, he reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through his ministry. 21:20They, when they heard it, glorified God. They said to him, "You see, brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for the law. 21:21They have been informed about you, that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children neither to walk after the customs. 21:22What then? The assembly must certainly meet, for they will hear that you have come. 21:23Therefore do what we tell you. We have four men who have a vow on them. 21:24Take them, and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads. Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the law. 21:25But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality." 21:26Then Paul took the men, and the next day, purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them. 21:27When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and laid hands on him, 21:28crying out, "Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple, and has defiled this holy place!" 21:29For they had seen Trophimus, the Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.

21:30All the city was moved, and the people ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors were shut. 21:31As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar. 21:32Immediately he took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul. 21:33Then the commanding officer came near, arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done. 21:34Some shouted one thing, some another, among the crowd. When he couldn't find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks.

21:35When he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd; 21:36for the multitude of the people followed after, crying out, "Away with him!" 21:37As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, "May I say something to you?"

He said, "Do you know Greek? 21:38Aren't you then the Egyptian, who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?"

21:39But Paul said, "I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the people."

21:40When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,

22:1"Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make to you."

22:2When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet. He said, 22:3"I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as you all are this day. 22:4I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women. 22:5As also the high priest and all the council of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the brothers, and journeyed to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished. 22:6It happened that, as I made my journey, and came close to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from the sky a great light around me. 22:7I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?' 22:8I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said to me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.' 22:9Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid, but they didn't understand the voice of him who spoke to me. 22:10I said, 'What will I do, Lord?' The Lord said to me, 'Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told about all things which are appointed for you to do.' 22:11When I couldn't see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into Damascus. 22:12One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well reported of by all the Jews who lived there, 22:13came to me, and standing by me said to me, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' In that very hour I looked up at him. 22:14He said, 'The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth. 22:15For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard. 22:16Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.' 22:17It happened that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance, 22:18and saw him saying to me, 'Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive testimony concerning me from you.' 22:19I said, 'Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you. 22:20When the blood of Stephen, your witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his death, and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.' 22:21He said to me, 'Depart, for I will send you forth far from here to the Gentiles.'"

22:22They listened to him until he said that, then they lifted up their voice, and said, "Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn't fit to live!"

22:23As they cried out, and threw off their cloaks, and threw dust into the air, 22:24the commanding officer commanded him to be brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging, that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that. 22:25When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the centurion who stood by, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman, and not found guilty?"

22:26When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding officer and told him, "Watch what you are about to do, for this man is a Roman!"

22:27The commanding officer came and asked him, "Tell me, are you a Roman?"

He said, "Yes."

22:28The commanding officer answered, "I bought my citizenship for a great price."

Paul said, "But I was born a Roman."

22:29Immediately those who were about to examine him departed from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized that he was a Roman, because he had bound him. 22:30But on the next day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews, he freed him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.

23:1Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, "Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until this day."

23:2The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth.

23:3Then said Paul to him, "God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me to be struck contrary to the law?"

23:4Those who stood by said, "Do you malign God's high priest?"

23:5Paul said, "I didn't know, brothers, that he was high priest. For it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.'" 23:6But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, "Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!" 23:7When he had said this, there arose an argument between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided. 23:8For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess all of these. 23:9A great clamor arose, and some of the scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and contended, saying, "We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him, let's not fight against God!" 23:10When a great argument arose, the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them, and bring him into the barracks.

23:11The following night, the Lord stood by him, and said, "Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must testify also at Rome."

23:12When it was day, some of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul. 23:13There were more than forty people who had made this conspiracy. 23:14They came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, "We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste nothing until we have killed Paul. 23:15Now therefore, you with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly. We are ready to kill him before he comes near." 23:16But Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul. 23:17Paul summoned one of the centurions, and said, "Bring this young man to the commanding officer, for he has something to tell him."

23:18So he took him, and brought him to the commanding officer, and said, "Paul, the prisoner, called me to himself, and asked me to bring this young man to you, who has something to tell you."

23:19The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going aside, asked him privately, "What is it that you have to tell me?"

23:20He said, "The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring down Paul tomorrow to the council, as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him. 23:21Therefore don't yield to them, for more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him. Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you."

23:22So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging him, "Tell no one that you have told these things to me." 23:23He called to himself two of the centurions, and said, "Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy horsemen, and two hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the night." 23:24He asked them to provide animals, that they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to Felix, the governor. 23:25He wrote a letter like this:

23:26"Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings.

23:27"This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them, when I came on them with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman. 23:28Desiring to know the cause why they accused him, I brought him down to their council. 23:29I found him to be accused about questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds. 23:30When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately, charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him before you. Farewell."

23:31So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris. 23:32But on the next day they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks. 23:33They, when they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, presented Paul also before him. 23:34When the governor had read it, he asked what province he was from. When he understood that he was from Cilicia, he said, 23:35"I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive." He commanded that he be kept in Herod's palace.

24:1After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor against Paul. 24:2When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, "Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that excellent measures are coming to this nation, 24:3we accept it in all ways and in all places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness. 24:4But, that I don't delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words. 24:5For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 24:6He even tried to profane the temple. We arrested him. *24:724:8 By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him." 24:9The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these things were so. 24:10When the governor had beckoned to him to speak, Paul answered, "Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense, 24:11seeing that you can recognize that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem. 24:12In the temple they didn't find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues, or in the city. 24:13Nor can they prove to you the things whereof they now accuse me. 24:14But this I confess to you, that after the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which are written in the prophets; 24:15having hope toward God, which these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. 24:16Herein I also practice always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men. 24:17Now after some years, I came to bring gifts to the needy to my nation, and offerings; 24:18amid which they found me purified in the temple, with no crowd, nor yet with tumult. But certain Jews from Asia -- 24:19who ought to have been here before you, and to make accusation, if they had anything against me. 24:20Or else let these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council, 24:21unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among them, 'Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before you today!'"

24:22But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, "When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will decide your case." 24:23He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody, and should have some privileges, and not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him. 24:24But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla, his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus. 24:25As he reasoned about righteousness, self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and answered, "Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me, I will call you to me." 24:26He hoped that way that money would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also he sent for him more often, and talked with him. 24:27But when two years were fulfilled, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.

25:1Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. 25:2Then the high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they begged him, 25:3asking a favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem; plotting to kill him on the way. 25:4However Festus answered that Paul was kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart shortly. 25:5"Let them therefore," said he, "that are in power among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him." 25:6When he had stayed among them more than ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat, and commanded Paul to be brought. 25:7When he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove, 25:8while he said in his defense, "Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all."

25:9But Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered Paul and said, "Will you go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?"

25:10But Paul said, "I am standing before Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well. 25:11For if I have done wrong, and have committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none of those things is true that these accuse me of, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!"

25:12Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, "You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you will go."

25:13Now when some days had passed, Agrippa, the King, and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, and greeted Festus. 25:14As they stayed there many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the King, saying, "There is a certain man left a prisoner by Felix; 25:15about whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for a sentence against him. 25:16To whom I answered that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction, before the accused have met the accusers face to face, and have had opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him. 25:17When therefore they were come together here, I didn't delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought. 25:18Concerning whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought no charge of such things as I supposed; 25:19but had certain questions against him of their own religion, and of one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. 25:20I, being perplexed how to inquire concerning these things, asked whether he would go to Jerusalem and there be judged of these matters. 25:21But when Paul had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept until I should send him to Caesar."

25:22Agrippa said to Festus, "I also would like to hear the man myself."

"Tomorrow," he said, "you will hear him."

25:23So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the commanding officers and principal men of the city, at the command of Festus, Paul was brought in. 25:24Festus said, "King Agrippa, and all men who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer. 25:25But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself appealed to the emperor I determined to send him. 25:26Of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him forth before you, and especially before you, king Agrippa, that, after examination, I may have something to write. 25:27For it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges against him."

26:1Agrippa said to Paul, "You may speak for yourself."

Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense. 26:2"I think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defense before you this day concerning all the things whereof I am accused by the Jews, 26:3especially because you are expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently.

26:4"Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem; 26:5having known me from the first, if they are willing to testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. 26:6Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers, 26:7which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa! 26:8Why is it judged incredible with you, if God does raise the dead?

26:9"I most assuredly thought with myself that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 26:10This I also did in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death I gave my vote against them. 26:11Punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

26:12"Whereupon as I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests, 26:13at noon, O King, I saw on the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those who traveled with me. 26:14When we had all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? It is hard for you to kick against the goad.' 26:15I said, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said, 'I am Jesus, whom you persecute. 26:16But arise, and stand on your feet, for to this end have I appeared to you, to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen, and of the things which I will reveal to you; 26:17delivering you from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you, 26:18to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'

26:19"Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, 26:20but declared first to them of Damascus, at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance. 26:21For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple, and tried to kill me. 26:22Having therefore obtained the help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses did say should come, 26:23how the Christ must suffer, and how he first by the resurrection of the dead should proclaim light both to these people and to the Gentiles."

26:24As he thus made his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, "Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!"

26:25But he said, "I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but speak forth words of truth and soberness. 26:26For the king knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner. 26:27King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe."

26:28Agrippa said to Paul, "With a little persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian?"

26:29Paul said, "I pray to God, that whether with little or with much, not only you, but also all that hear me this day, might become such as I am, except for these bonds."

26:30The king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and those who sat with them. 26:31When they had withdrawn, they spoke one to another, saying, "This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds." 26:32Agrippa said to Festus, "This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar."

27:1When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band. 27:2Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us. 27:3The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself. 27:4Putting to sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. 27:5When we had sailed across the sea which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. 27:6There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us on board. 27:7When we had sailed slowly many days, and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone. 27:8With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea. 27:9When much time was spent, and the voyage was now dangerous, because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them, 27:10and said to them, "Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives." 27:11But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul. 27:12Because the haven was not suitable to winter in, the majority advised to put to sea from there, if by any means they could reach Phoenix, and winter there, which is a port of Crete, looking northeast and southeast.

27:13When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete, close to shore. 27:14But after no long time there beat down from it a tempestuous wind, which is called Euroclydon. 27:15When the ship was caught, and couldn't face the wind, we gave way to it, and were driven along. 27:16Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat. 27:17When they had hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven. 27:18As we labored exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things overboard. 27:19On the third day, they threw out the ship's tackle with their own hands. 27:20When neither sun nor stars shone on us for many days, and no small tempest pressed on us, all hope that we should be saved was now taken away.

27:21When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the midst of them, and said, "Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not have set sail from Crete, and have gotten this injury and loss. 27:22Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship. 27:23For there stood by me this night an angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve, 27:24saying, 'Don't be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail with you.' 27:25Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me. 27:26But we must run aground on a certain island." 27:27But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land. 27:28They took soundings, and found twenty fathoms. After a little while, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms. 27:29Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for daylight. 27:30As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow, 27:31Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, "Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be saved." 27:32Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off. 27:33While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take some food, saying, "This day is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing. 27:34Therefore I beg you to take some food, for this is for your safety; for there will not a hair perish from the head of any of you." 27:35When he had said this, and had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all, and he broke it, and began to eat. 27:36Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took food. 27:37We were in all in the ship two hundred seventy-six souls. 27:38When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea. 27:39When it was day, they didn't recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it. 27:40Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach. 27:41But coming to a place where two seas met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable, but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.

27:42The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape. 27:43But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go to the land; 27:44and the rest, some on planks, and some on other things from the ship. So it happened that they all escaped safely to the land.

28:1When we had escaped, then we knew that the island was called Malta. 28:2The natives shown us no common kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. 28:3But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat, and fastened on his hand. 28:4When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said one to another, "No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not allowed to live." 28:5However he shook off the creature into the fire, and wasn't harmed. 28:6But they expected that he would have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they were long in expectation and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.

28:7Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us, and courteously entertained us three days. 28:8It was so, that the father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him. 28:9Then when this was done, the rest also that had diseases in the island came, and were cured. 28:10They also honored us with many honors, and when we sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.

28:11After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose sign was "The Twin Brothers." 28:12Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three days. 28:13From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli, 28:14where we found brothers, and were entreated to stay with them seven days. So we came to Rome. 28:15From there the brothers, when they heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns; whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage. 28:16When we entered into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him.

28:17It happened, that after three days Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said to them, "I, brothers, though I had done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans, 28:18who, when they had examined me, desired to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me. 28:19But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation. 28:20For this cause therefore did I ask you to see and to speak with me. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain."

28:21They said to him, "We neither received letters from Judea concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or speak any evil of you. 28:22But we desire to hear of you what you think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against." 28:23When they had appointed him a day, they came to him into his lodging in great number. He explained to them, testifying about the kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening. 28:24Some believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved. 28:25When they didn't agree among themselves, they departed after Paul had spoken one word, "The Holy Spirit spoke well through Isaiah, the prophet, to our fathers, 28:26saying,

 'Go to this people, and say,

 In hearing, you will hear, and will in no way understand.

 In seeing, you will see, and will in no way perceive.

 28:27For this people's heart has grown callous.

 Their ears are dull of hearing.

 Their eyes they have closed.

 Lest they should see with their eyes,

 Hear with their ears,

 Understand with their heart,

 Would turn again,

 And I would heal them.'

28:28"Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles. They will also hear." 28:29When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a great dispute among themselves. 28:30Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and received all who went in to him, 28:31preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hinderance.

Notes:

[1] back to 2:15 about 9:00 AM

[2] back to 3:1 3:00 PM

[3] back to 8:37 Some Greek texts add: Philip said, "If you believe with all your heart, you may." He answered, "I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God."

[4] back to 9:36 Dorcas is Greek for Gazelle.

[5] back to 10:3 about 3:00 PM

[6] back to 15:34 Some manuscripts add: But it seemed good to Silas to stay there.

[7] back to 19:19 The 50,000 pieces of silver here probably referred to 50,000 drachmas. If so, the value of the burned books was equivalent to about 160 man-years of wages for agricultural laborers

[8] back to 23:23 about 9:00 PM

[9] back to 24:6 Textus Receptus adds: We wanted to judge him according to our law, but the commanding officer, Lysias, came by and with great violence took him out of our hands, commanding his accusers to come to you.

[10] back to 27:14 or possibly "a northeaster"

[11] back to 27:28 20 fathoms = 36.6 meters

[12] back to 27:28 15 fathoms = 27.4 meters

